<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Editor's Preface</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Editor's Preface</h2>

<p>The <i>Suspiria</i> have a complex publication history.  De Quincey originally published them in <i>Blackwood's Magazine</i> in 1845, intending them to be a kind of sequel to his <i>Confessions of an English Opium-Eater</i>.  In their first incarnation, "Dreaming" was presented as an "Introductory Notice", and "Vision of Life" and "Memorial Suspiria" were joined as a single "Part 2".</p>

<p>De Quincey later edited and released an updated version of the <i>Suspiria</i> in his <i>Collected Works</i>.  These are the versions of the <i>Suspiria</i> we have included in this edition, with the exception of "The Affliction of Childhood", which he merged into his larger <i>Autobiographic Sketches</i>.  We present the initial, independent version of "The Affliction of Childhood" here.</p>

<p>Finally, several <i>Suspiria</i> appeared as posthumous publications, and we include those here as well.  We have ordered all of the <i>Suspiria</i> not as they were originally published, but in the order suggested by Alexander H. Japp in his <a href="http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/23788"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Posthumous Works of Thomas De Quincey</i>, Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></a>.</p>

<p>Of the <i>Suspiria</i> published during De Quincey's life, only the Blackwood's editions have been available as transcriptions online.  The edition you're reading now is, to the editor's knowledge, the first transcription of the later <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collected Works</i> versions.</p>

<p>"Dreaming," "The Palimpsest of the Human Brain," "Vision of Life," "Memorial Suspiria," "Levana and Our Ladies of Sorrow," and "Savannah-La-Mer" were transcribed from <a href="https://archive.org/details/collectedwritin02massgoog"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Quincey's Collected Writings</i> Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></a>, edited by David Masson.</p>

<p>"Daughter of Lebanon" was transcribed from <a href="https://archive.org/details/collectedwritin07quingoog">Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></a> of the same set.</p>

<p>"The Apparition of the Brocken" was transcribed from <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=e4BKAAAAYAAJ"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Confessions of an English Opium-Eater, and Kindred Papers</i></a>.</p>

</section>
</body>
</html>
