<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Editor’s Preface</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Editor’s Preface</h2>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Suspiria</i> have a complex publication history.  De Quincey originally published them in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Blackwood’s Magazine</i> in 1845, intending them to be a kind of sequel to his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Confessions of an English Opium-Eater</i>.  In their first incarnation, “Dreaming” was presented as an “Introductory Notice,” and “Vision of Life” and “Memorial Suspiria” were joined as a single “Part 2.”</p>
			<p>De Quincey later edited and released an updated version of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Suspiria</i> in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collected Works</i>, with the exception of “The Affliction of Childhood,” which he merged into his larger <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Autobiographic Sketches</i>.  The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collected Works</i> versions are the versions presented here, along with the initial, independent version of “The Affliction of Childhood.” Several <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Suspiria</i> appeared as posthumous publications, and they’re included here as well.</p>
			<p>De Quincey ultimately planned for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Suspiria</i> to be published together in a single volume.  Unfortunately he didn’t live to see his plan completed, and today only those <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Suspiria</i> remain that escaped time, fire, and addiction.  They’re presented in this edition not in the order in which they were originally published, but in the order suggested by Alexander <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Japp in his <a href="https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/23788"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Posthumous Works of Thomas De Quincey</i>, Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></a>.</p>
			<p>Of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Suspiria</i> published during De Quincey’s life, to date only the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Blackwood’s</i> editions have been available as digital transcriptions.  The edition you’re reading now is, to the editor’s knowledge, the first digital transcription of the later <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collected Works</i> versions.</p>
			<p>“Dreaming,” “The Palimpsest of the Human Brain,” “Vision of Life,” “Memorial Suspiria,” “Levana and Our Ladies of Sorrow,” and “Savannah-La-Mer” were transcribed from <a href="https://archive.org/details/collectedwritin02massgoog"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Quincey’s Collected Writings</i> Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></a>, edited by David Masson.  A paragraph at the end of “The Affliction of Childhood,” which is duplicated in “Dreaming,” has been removed.</p>
			<p>“Daughter of Lebanon” was transcribed from <a href="https://archive.org/details/collectedwritin07quingoog">Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></a> of the same set.</p>
			<p>“The Apparition of the Brocken” was transcribed from <a href="https://books.google.com/books?id=e4BKAAAAYAAJ"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Confessions of an English Opium-Eater, and Kindred Papers</i></a>.</p>
			<footer>
				<p class="signature">Alex Cabal</p>
				<p>Chicago, December 2016</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
