<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The English Mail-Coach</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-english-mail-coach" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The English Mail-Coach</h2>

    <h2>
      THE ENGLISH MAIL-COACH
    </h2>
    <p>
      <br /><br />
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_SECT" id="link2H_SECT"> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      SECTION I&mdash;THE GLORY OF MOTION
    </h2>
    <p>
      Some twenty or more years before I matriculated at Oxford, Mr. Palmer, at
      that time M.P. for Bath, had accomplished two things, very hard to do on
      our little planet, the Earth, however cheap they may be held by eccentric
      people in comets: he had invented mail-coaches, and he had married the
      daughter of a duke. He was, therefore, just twice as great a man as
      Galileo, who did certainly invent (or, which is the same thing, [Footnote:
      "<i>The same thing</i>":&mdash;Thus, in the calendar of the Church
      Festivals, the discovery of the true cross (by Helen, the mother of
      Constantine) is recorded (and, one might think, with the express
      consciousness of sarcasm) as the <i>Invention</i> of the Cross.] discover)
      the satellites of Jupiter, those very next things extant to mail-coaches
      in the two capital pretensions of speed and keeping time, but, on the
      other hand, who did <i>not</i> marry the daughter of a duke.
    </p>
    <p>
      These mail-coaches, as organised by Mr. Palmer, are entitled to a
      circumstantial notice from myself, having had so large a share in
      developing the anarchies of my subsequent dreams: an agency which they
      accomplished, 1st, through velocity at that time unprecedented&mdash;for
      they first revealed the glory of motion; 2dly, through grand effects for
      the eye between lamplight and the darkness upon solitary roads; 3dly,
      through animal beauty and power so often displayed in the class of horses
      selected for this mail service; 4thly, through the conscious presence of a
      central intellect, that, in the midst of vast distances [Footnote: "Vast
      distances":&mdash;One case was familiar to mail-coach travellers where two
      mails in opposite directions, north and south, starting at the same minute
      from points six hundred miles apart, met almost constantly at a particular
      bridge which bisected the total distance.]&mdash;of storms, of darkness,
      of danger&mdash;overruled all obstacles into one steady co-operation to a
      national result. For my own feeling, this post-office service spoke as by
      some mighty orchestra, where a thousand instruments, all disregarding each
      other, and so far in danger of discord, yet all obedient as slaves to the
      supreme <i>baton</i> of some great leader, terminate in a perfection of
      harmony like that of heart, brain, and lungs in a healthy animal
      organisation. But, finally, that particular element in this whole
      combination which most impressed myself, and through which it is that to
      this hour Mr. Palmer's mail-coach system tyrannises over my dreams by
      terror and terrific beauty, lay in the awful <i>political</i> mission
      which at that time it fulfilled. The mail-coach it was that distributed
      over the face of the land, like the opening of apocalyptic vials, the
      heart-shaking news of Trafalgar, of Salamanca, of Vittoria, of Waterloo.
      These were the harvests that, in the grandeur of their reaping, redeemed
      the tears and blood in which they had been sown. Neither was the meanest
      peasant so much below the grandeur and the sorrow of the times as to
      confound battles such as these, which were gradually moulding the
      destinies of Christendom, with the vulgar conflicts of ordinary warfare,
      so often no more than gladiatorial trials of national prowess. The
      victories of England in this stupendous contest rose of themselves as
      natural <i>Te Deums</i> to heaven; and it was felt by the thoughtful that
      such victories, at such a crisis of general prostration, were not more
      beneficial to ourselves than finally to France, our enemy, and to the
      nations of all western or central Europe, through whose pusillanimity it
      was that the French domination had prospered.
    </p>
    <p>
      The mail-coach, as the national organ for publishing these mighty events,
      thus diffusively influential, became itself a spiritualised and glorified
      object to an impassioned heart; and naturally, in the Oxford of that day,
      <i>all</i> hearts were impassioned, as being all (or nearly all) in <i>early</i>
      manhood. In most universities there is one single college; in Oxford there
      were five-and-twenty, all of which were peopled by young men, the <i>élite</i>
      of their own generation; not boys, but men: none under eighteen. In some
      of these many colleges the custom permitted the student to keep what are
      called "short terms"; that is, the four terms of Michaelmas, Lent, Easter,
      and Act, were kept by a residence, in the aggregate, of ninety-one days,
      or thirteen weeks. Under this interrupted residence, it was possible that
      a student might have a reason for going down to his home four times in the
      year. This made eight journeys to and fro. But, as these homes lay
      dispersed through all the shires of the island, and most of us disdained
      all coaches except his Majesty's mail, no city out of London could pretend
      to so extensive a connexion with Mr. Palmer's establishment as Oxford.
      Three mails, at the least, I remember as passing every day through Oxford,
      and benefiting by my personal patronage&mdash;viz., the Worcester, the
      Gloucester, and the Holyhead mail. Naturally, therefore, it became a point
      of some interest with us, whose journeys revolved every six weeks on an
      average, to look a little into the executive details of the system. With
      some of these Mr. Palmer had no concern; they rested upon bye-laws enacted
      by posting-houses for their own benefit, and upon other bye-laws, equally
      stern, enacted by the inside passengers for the illustration of their own
      haughty exclusiveness. These last were of a nature to rouse our scorn;
      from which the transition was not very long to systematic mutiny. Up to
      this time, say 1804, or 1805 (the year of Trafalgar), it had been the
      fixed assumption of the four inside people (as an old tradition of all
      public carriages derived from the reign of Charles II) that they, the
      illustrious quaternion, constituted a porcelain variety of the human race,
      whose dignity would have been compromised by exchanging one word of
      civility with the three miserable delf-ware outsides. Even to have kicked
      an outsider might have been held to attaint the foot concerned in that
      operation, so that, perhaps, it would have required an act of Parliament
      to restore its purity of blood. What words, then, could express the
      horror, and the sense of treason, in that case, which <i>had</i> happened,
      where all three outsides (the trinity of Pariahs) made a vain attempt to
      sit down at the same breakfast-table or dinner-table with the consecrated
      four? I myself witnessed such an attempt; and on that occasion a
      benevolent old gentleman endeavoured to soothe his three holy associates,
      by suggesting that, if the outsides were indicted for this criminal
      attempt at the next assizes, the court would regard it as a case of lunacy
      or <i>delirium tremens</i> rather than of treason. England owes much of
      her grandeur to the depth of the aristocratic element in her social
      composition, when pulling against her strong democracy. I am not the man
      to laugh at it. But sometimes, undoubtedly, it expressed itself in comic
      shapes. The course taken with the infatuated outsiders, in the particular
      attempt which I have noticed, was that the waiter, beckoning them away
      from the privileged <i>salle-à-manger</i>, sang out, "This way, my good
      men," and then enticed these good men away to the kitchen. But that plan
      had not always answered. Sometimes, though rarely, cases occurred where
      the intruders, being stronger than usual, or more vicious than usual,
      resolutely refused to budge, and so far carried their point as to have a
      separate table arranged for themselves in a corner of the general room.
      Yet, if an Indian screen could be found ample enough to plant them out
      from the very eyes of the high table, or <i>dais</i>, it then became
      possible to assume as a fiction of law that the three delf fellows, after
      all, were not present. They could be ignored by the porcelain men, under
      the maxim that objects not appearing and objects not existing are governed
      by the same logical construction. [Footnote: <i>De non apparentibus</i>,
      etc.]
    </p>
    <p>
      Such being, at that time, the usage of mail-coaches, what was to be done
      by us of young Oxford? We, the most aristocratic of people, who were
      addicted to the practice of looking down superciliously even upon the
      insides themselves as often very questionable characters&mdash;were we, by
      voluntarily going outside, to court indignities? If our dress and bearing
      sheltered us generally from the suspicion of being "raff" (the name at
      that period for "snobs" [Footnote: "<i>Snobs</i>," and its antithesis, "<i>nobs</i>,"
      arose among the internal factions of shoemakers perhaps ten years later.
      Possibly enough, the terms may have existed much earlier; but they were
      then first made known, picturesquely and effectively, by a trial at some
      assizes which happened to fix the public attention.]), we really <i>were</i>
      such constructively by the place we assumed. If we did not submit to the
      deep shadow of eclipse, we entered at least the skirts of its penumbra.
      And the analogy of theatres was valid against us,&mdash;where no man can
      complain of the annoyances incident to the pit or gallery, having his
      instant remedy in paying the higher price of the boxes. But the soundness
      of this analogy we disputed. In the case of the theatre, it cannot be
      pretended that the inferior situations have any separate attractions,
      unless the pit may be supposed to have an advantage for the purposes of
      the critic or the dramatic reporter. But the critic or reporter is a
      rarity. For most people, the sole benefit is in the price. Now, on the
      contrary, the outside of the mail had its own incommunicable advantages.
      These we could not forego. The higher price we would willingly have paid,
      but not the price connected with the condition of riding inside; which
      condition we pronounced insufferable. The air, the freedom of prospect,
      the proximity to the horses, the elevation of seat: these were what we
      required; but, above all, the certain anticipation of purchasing
      occasional opportunities of driving.
    </p>
    <p>
      Such was the difficulty which pressed us; and under the coercion of this
      difficulty we instituted a searching inquiry into the true quality and
      valuation of the different apartments about the mail. We conducted this
      inquiry on metaphysical principles; and it was ascertained satisfactorily
      that the roof of the coach, which by some weak men had been called the
      attics, and by some the garrets, was in reality the drawing-room; in which
      drawing-room the box was the chief ottoman or sofa; whilst it appeared
      that the <i>inside</i> which had been traditionally regarded as the only
      room tenantable by gentlemen, was, in fact, the coal-cellar in disguise.
    </p>
    <p>
      Great wits jump. The very same idea had not long before struck the
      celestial intellect of China. Amongst the presents carried out by our
      first embassy to that country was a state-coach. It had been specially
      selected as a personal gift by George III; but the exact mode of using it
      was an intense mystery to Pekin. The ambassador, indeed (Lord Macartney),
      had made some imperfect explanations upon this point; but, as His
      Excellency communicated these in a diplomatic whisper at the very moment
      of his departure, the celestial intellect was very feebly illuminated, and
      it became necessary to call a cabinet council on the grand state question,
      "Where was the Emperor to sit?" The hammer-cloth happened to be unusually
      gorgeous; and, partly on that consideration, but partly also because the
      box offered the most elevated seat, was nearest to the moon, and
      undeniably went foremost, it was resolved by acclamation that the box was
      the imperial throne, and, for the scoundrel who drove,&mdash;he might sit
      where he could find a perch. The horses, therefore, being harnessed,
      solemnly his imperial majesty ascended his new English throne under a
      flourish of trumpets, having the first lord of the treasury on his right
      hand, and the chief jester on his left. Pekin gloried in the spectacle;
      and in the whole flowery people, constructively present by representation,
      there was but one discontented person, and <i>that</i> was the coachman.
      This mutinous individual audaciously shouted, "Where am <i>I</i> to sit?"
      But the privy council, incensed by his disloyalty, unanimously opened the
      door, and kicked him into the inside. He had all the inside places to
      himself; but such is the rapacity of ambition that he was still
      dissatisfied. "I say," he cried out in an extempore petition addressed to
      the Emperor through the window&mdash;"I say, how am I to catch hold of the
      reins?"&mdash;"Anyhow," was the imperial answer; "don't trouble <i>me</i>,
      man, in my glory. How catch the reins? Why, through the windows, through
      the keyholes&mdash;<i>anyhow</i>." Finally this contumacious coachman
      lengthened the check-strings into a sort of jury-reins communicating with
      the horses; with these he drove as steadily as Pekin had any right to
      expect. The Emperor returned after the briefest of circuits; he descended
      in great pomp from his throne, with the severest resolution never to
      remount it. A public thanksgiving was ordered for his majesty's happy
      escape from the disease of a broken neck; and the state-coach was
      dedicated thenceforward as a votive offering to the god Fo Fo&mdash;whom
      the learned more accurately called Fi Fi.
    </p>
    <p>
      A revolution of this same Chinese character did young Oxford of that era
      effect in the constitution of mail-coach society. It was a perfect French
      Revolution; and we had good reason to say, <i>ça ira</i>. In fact, it soon
      became <i>too</i> popular. The "public"&mdash;a well-known character,
      particularly disagreeable, though slightly respectable, and notorious for
      affecting the chief seats in synagogues&mdash;had at first loudly opposed
      this revolution; but, when the opposition showed itself to be ineffectual,
      our disagreeable friend went into it with headlong zeal. At first it was a
      sort of race between us; and, as the public is usually from thirty to
      fifty years old, naturally we of young Oxford, that averaged about twenty,
      had the advantage. Then the public took to bribing, giving fees to
      horse-keepers, &amp;c., who hired out their persons as warming-pans on the
      box seat. <i>That</i>, you know, was shocking to all moral sensibilities.
      Come to bribery, said we, and there is an end to all morality,&mdash;Aristotle's,
      Zeno's, Cicero's, or anybody's. And, besides, of what use was it? For <i>we</i>
      bribed also. And, as our bribes, to those of the public, were as five
      shillings to sixpence, here again young Oxford had the advantage. But the
      contest was ruinous to the principles of the stables connected with the
      mails. This whole corporation was constantly bribed, rebribed, and often
      surrebribed; a mail-coach yard was like the hustings in a contested
      election; and a horse-keeper, ostler, or helper, was held by the
      philosophical at that time to be the most corrupt character in the nation.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was an impression upon the public mind, natural enough from the
      continually augmenting velocity of the mail, but quite erroneous, that an
      outside seat on this class of carriages was a post of danger. On the
      contrary, I maintained that, if a man had become nervous from some gipsy
      prediction in his childhood, allocating to a particular moon now
      approaching some unknown danger, and he should inquire earnestly, "Whither
      can I fly for shelter? Is a prison the safest retreat? or a lunatic
      hospital? or the British Museum?" I should have replied, "Oh no; I'll tell
      you what to do. Take lodgings for the next forty days on the box of his
      Majesty's mail. Nobody can touch you there. If it is by bills at ninety
      days after date that you are made unhappy&mdash;if noters and protesters
      are the sort of wretches whose astrological shadows darken the house of
      life&mdash;then note you what I vehemently protest: viz., that, no matter
      though the sheriff and under-sheriff in every county should be running
      after you with his <i>posse</i>, touch a hair of your head he cannot
      whilst you keep house and have your legal domicile on the box of the mail.
      It is felony to stop the mail; even the sheriff cannot do that. And an <i>extra</i>
      touch of the whip to the leaders (no great matter if it grazes the
      sheriff) at any time guarantees your safety." In fact, a bedroom in a
      quiet house seems a safe enough retreat; yet it is liable to its own
      notorious nuisances&mdash;to robbers by night, to rats, to fire. But the
      mail laughs at these terrors. To robbers, the answer is packed up and
      ready for delivery in the barrel of the guard's blunderbuss. Rats again!
      there <i>are</i> none about mail-coaches any more than snakes in Von
      Troil's Iceland; [Footnote: "<i>Von Troil's Iceland</i>":&mdash;The
      allusion is to a well-known chapter in Von Troil's work, entitled,
      "Concerning the Snakes of Iceland." The entire chapter consists of these
      six words&mdash;"<i>There art no snakes in Iceland</i>."] except, indeed,
      now and then a parliamentary rat, who always hides his shame in what I
      have shown to be the "coal-cellar." And, as to fire, I never knew but one
      in a mail-coach; which was in the Exeter mail, and caused by an obstinate
      sailor bound to Devonport. Jack, making light of the law and the lawgiver
      that had set their faces against his offence, insisted on taking up a
      forbidden seat [Footnote: "<i>Forbidden seat</i>":&mdash;The very sternest
      code of rules was enforced upon the mails by the Post-office. Throughout
      England, only three outsides were allowed, of whom one was to sit on the
      box, and the other two immediately behind the box; none, under any
      pretext, to come near the guard; an indispensable caution; since else,
      under the guise of a passenger, a robber might by any one of a thousand
      advantages&mdash;which sometimes are created, but always are favoured, by
      the animation of frank social intercourse&mdash;have disarmed the guard.
      Beyond the Scottish border, the regulation was so far relaxed as to allow
      of <i>four</i> outsides, but not relaxed at all as to the mode of placing
      them. One, as before, was seated on the box, and the other three on the
      front of the roof, with a determinate and ample separation from the little
      insulated chair of the guard. This relaxation was conceded by way of
      compensating to Scotland her disadvantages in point of population.
      England, by the superior density of her population, might always count
      upon a large fund of profits in the fractional trips of chance passengers
      riding for short distances of two or three stages. In Scotland this chance
      counted for much less. And therefore, to make good the deficiency,
      Scotland was allowed a compensatory profit upon one <i>extra</i>
      passenger.] in the rear of the roof, from which he could exchange his own
      yarns with those of the guard. No greater offence was then known to
      mail-coaches; it was treason, it was <i>læsa majestas</i>, it was by
      tendency arson; and the ashes of Jack's pipe, falling amongst the straw of
      the hinder boot, containing the mail-bags, raised a flame which (aided by
      the wind of our motion) threatened a revolution in the republic of
      letters. Yet even this left the sanctity of the box unviolated. In
      dignified repose, the coachman and myself sat on, resting with benign
      composure upon our knowledge that the fire would have to burn its way
      through four inside passengers before it could reach ourselves. I remarked
      to the coachman, with a quotation from Virgil's "Æneid" really too
      hackneyed&mdash;
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  "Jam proximus ardet
  Ucalegon."
</pre>
    <p>
      But, recollecting that the Virgilian part of the coachman's education
      might have been neglected, I interpreted so far as to say that perhaps at
      that moment the flames were catching hold of our worthy brother and inside
      passenger, Ucalegon. The coachman made no answer,&mdash;which is my own
      way when a stranger addresses me either in Syriac or in Coptic; but by his
      faint sceptical smile he seemed to insinuate that he knew better,&mdash;for
      that Ucalegon, as it happened, was not in the way-bill, and therefore
      could not have been booked.
    </p>
    <p>
      No dignity is perfect which does not at some point ally itself with the
      mysterious. The connexion of the mail with the state and the executive
      government&mdash;a connexion obvious, but yet not strictly defined&mdash;gave
      to the whole mail establishment an official grandeur which did us service
      on the roads, and invested us with seasonable terrors. Not the less
      impressive were those terrors because their legal limits were imperfectly
      ascertained. Look at those turnpike gates: with what deferential hurry,
      with what an obedient start, they fly open at our approach! Look at that
      long line of carts and carters ahead, audaciously usurping the very crest
      of the road. Ah! traitors, they do not hear us as yet; but, as soon as the
      dreadful blast of our horn reaches them with proclamation of our approach,
      see with what frenzy of trepidation they fly to their horses' heads, and
      deprecate our wrath by the precipitation of their crane-neck quarterings.
      Treason they feel to be their crime; each individual carter feels himself
      under the ban of confiscation and attainder; his blood is attainted
      through six generations; and nothing is wanting but the headsman and his
      axe, the block and the sawdust, to close up the vista of his horrors.
      What! shall it be within benefit of clergy to delay the king's message on
      the high road?&mdash;to interrupt the great respirations, ebb and flood,
      <i>systole</i> and <i>diastole</i>, of the national intercourse?&mdash;to
      endanger the safety of tidings running day and night between all nations
      and languages? Or can it be fancied, amongst the weakest of men, that the
      bodies of the criminals will be given up to their widows for Christian
      burial? Now, the doubts which were raised as to our powers did more to
      wrap them in terror, by wrapping them in uncertainty, than could have been
      effected by the sharpest definitions of the law from the Quarter Sessions.
      We, on our parts (we, the collective mail, I mean), did our utmost to
      exalt the idea of our privileges by the insolence with which we wielded
      them. Whether this insolence rested upon law that gave it a sanction, or
      upon conscious power that haughtily dispensed with that sanction, equally
      it spoke from a potential station; and the agent, in each particular
      insolence of the moment, was viewed reverentially, as one having
      authority.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sometimes after breakfast his Majesty's mail would become frisky; and, in
      its difficult wheelings amongst the intricacies of early markets, it would
      upset an apple-cart, a cart loaded with eggs, &amp;c. Huge was the
      affliction and dismay, awful was the smash. I, as far as possible,
      endeavoured in such a case to represent the conscience and moral
      sensibilities of the mail; and, when wildernesses of eggs were lying
      poached under our horses' hoofs, then would I stretch forth my hands in
      sorrow, saying (in words too celebrated at that time, from the false
      echoes [Footnote: "<i>False echoes</i>":&mdash;Yes, false! for the words
      ascribed to Napoleon, as breathed to the memory of Desaix, never were
      uttered at all. They stand in the same category of theatrical fictions as
      the cry of the foundering line-of-battle ship <i>Vengeur</i>, as the vaunt
      of General Cambronne at Waterloo, "La Garde meurt, mais ne se rend pas,"
      or as the repartees of Talleyrand.] of Marengo), "Ah! wherefore have we
      not time to weep over you?"&mdash;which was evidently impossible, since,
      in fact, we had not time to laugh over them. Tied to post-office allowance
      in some cases of fifty minutes for eleven miles, could the royal mail
      pretend to undertake the offices of sympathy and condolence? Could it be
      expected to provide tears for the accidents of the road? If even it seemed
      to trample on humanity, it did so, I felt, in discharge of its own more
      peremptory duties.
    </p>
    <p>
      Upholding the morality of the mail, <i>a fortiori</i> I upheld its rights;
      as a matter of duty, I stretched to the uttermost its privilege of
      imperial precedency, and astonished weak minds by the feudal powers which
      I hinted to be lurking constructively in the charters of this proud
      establishment. Once I remember being on the box of the Holyhead mail,
      between Shrewsbury and Oswestry, when a tawdry thing from Birmingham, some
      "Tallyho" or "Highflyer," all flaunting with green and gold, came up
      alongside of us. What a contrast to our royal simplicity of form and
      colour in this plebeian wretch! The single ornament on our dark ground of
      chocolate colour was the mighty shield of the imperial arms, but
      emblazoned in proportions as modest as a signet-ring bears to a seal of
      office. Even this was displayed only on a single panel, whispering, rather
      than proclaiming, our relations to the mighty state; whilst the beast from
      Birmingham, our green-and-gold friend from false, fleeting, perjured
      Brummagem, had as much writing and painting on its sprawling flanks as
      would have puzzled a decipherer from the tombs of Luxor. For some time
      this Birmingham machine ran along by our side&mdash;a piece of familiarity
      that already of itself seemed to me sufficiently Jacobinical. But all at
      once a movement of the horses announced a desperate intention of leaving
      us behind. "Do you see <i>that?</i>" I said to the coachman.&mdash;"I
      see," was his short answer. He was wide awake,&mdash;yet he waited longer
      than seemed prudent; for the horses of our audacious opponent had a
      disagreeable air of freshness and power. But his motive was loyal; his
      wish was that the Birmingham conceit should be full-blown before he froze
      it. When <i>that</i> seemed right, he unloosed, or, to speak by a stronger
      word, he <i>sprang</i>, his known resources: he slipped our royal horses
      like cheetahs, or hunting-leopards, after the affrighted game. How they
      could retain such a reserve of fiery power after the work they had
      accomplished seemed hard to explain. But on our side, besides the physical
      superiority, was a tower of moral strength, namely the king's name, "which
      they upon the adverse faction wanted." Passing them without an effort, as
      it seemed, we threw them into the rear with so lengthening an interval
      between us as proved in itself the bitterest mockery of their presumption;
      whilst our guard blew back a shattering blast of triumph that was really
      too painfully full of derision.
    </p>
    <p>
      I mention this little incident for its connexion with what followed. A
      Welsh rustic, sitting behind me, asked if I had not felt my heart burn
      within me during the progress of the race? I said, with philosophic
      calmness, <i>No</i>; because we were not racing with a mail, so that no
      glory could be gained. In fact, it was sufficiently mortifying that such a
      Birmingham thing should dare to challenge us. The Welshman replied that he
      didn't see <i>that</i>; for that a cat might look at a king, and a
      Brummagem coach might lawfully race the Holyhead mail. "<i>Race</i> us, if
      you like," I replied, "though even <i>that</i> has an air of sedition; but
      not <i>beat</i> us. This would have been treason; and for its own sake I
      am glad that the 'Tallyho' was disappointed." So dissatisfied did the
      Welshman seem with this opinion that at last I was obliged to tell him a
      very fine story from one of our elder dramatists: viz., that once, in some
      far Oriental kingdom, when the sultan of all the land, with his princes,
      ladies, and chief omrahs, were flying their falcons, a hawk suddenly flew
      at a majestic eagle, and, in defiance of the eagle's natural advantages,
      in contempt also of the eagle's traditional royalty, and before the whole
      assembled field of astonished spectators from Agra and Lahore, killed the
      eagle on the spot. Amazement seized the sultan at the unequal contest, and
      burning admiration for its unparalleled result. He commanded that the hawk
      should be brought before him; he caressed the bird with enthusiasm; and he
      ordered that, for the commemoration of his matchless courage, a diadem of
      gold and rubies should be solemnly placed on the hawk's head, but then
      that, immediately after this solemn coronation, the bird should be led off
      to execution, as the most valiant indeed of traitors, but not the less a
      traitor, as having dared to rise rebelliously against his liege lord and
      anointed sovereign, the eagle. "Now," said I to the Welshman, "to you and
      me, as men of refined sensibilities, how painful it would have been that
      this poor Brummagem brute, the 'Tallyho,' in the impossible case of a
      victory over us, should have been crowned with Birmingham tinsel, with
      paste diamonds and Roman pearls, and then led off to instant execution."
      The Welshman doubted if that could be warranted by law. And, when I hinted
      at the 6th of Edward Longshanks, chap. 18, for regulating the precedency
      of coaches, as being probably the statute relied on for the capital
      punishment of such offences, he replied drily that, if the attempt to pass
      a mail really were treasonable, it was a pity that the "Tallyho" appeared
      to have so imperfect an acquaintance with law.
    </p>
    <p>
      The modern modes of travelling cannot compare with the old mail-coach
      system in grandeur and power. They boast of more velocity,&mdash;not,
      however, as a consciousness, but as a fact of our lifeless knowledge,
      resting upon <i>alien</i> evidence: as, for instance, because somebody <i>says</i>
      that we have gone fifty miles in the hour, though we are far from feeling
      it as a personal experience; or upon the evidence of a result, as that
      actually we find ourselves in York four hours after leaving London. Apart
      from such an assertion, or such a result, I myself am little aware of the
      pace. But, seated on the old mail-coach, we needed no evidence out of
      ourselves to indicate the velocity. On this system the word was not <i>magna
      loquimur</i>, as upon railways, but <i>vivimus</i>. Yes, "magna <i>vivimus</i>";
      we do not make verbal ostentation of our grandeurs, we realise our
      grandeurs in act, and in the very experience of life. The vital experience
      of the glad animal sensibilities made doubts impossible on the question of
      our speed; we heard our speed, we saw it, we felt it as a thrilling; and
      this speed was not the product of blind insensate agencies, that had no
      sympathy to give, but was incarnated in the fiery eyeballs of the noblest
      amongst brutes, in his dilated nostril, spasmodic muscles, and
      thunder-beating hoofs. The sensibility of the horse, uttering itself in
      the maniac light of his eye, might be the last vibration of such a
      movement; the glory of Salamanca might be the first. But the intervening
      links that connected them, that spread the earthquake of battle into the
      eyeballs of the horse, were the heart of man and its electric thrillings&mdash;kindling
      in the rapture of the fiery strife, and then propagating its own tumults
      by contagious shouts and gestures to the heart of his servant the horse.
      But now, on the new system of travelling, iron tubes and boilers have
      disconnected man's heart from the ministers of his locomotion. Nile nor
      Trafalgar has power to raise an extra bubble in a steam-kettle. The
      galvanic cycle is broken up for ever; man's imperial nature no longer
      sends itself forward through the electric sensibility of the horse; the
      inter-agencies are gone in the mode of communication between the horse and
      his master out of which grew so many aspects of sublimity under accidents
      of mists that hid, or sudden blazes that revealed, of mobs that agitated,
      or midnight solitudes that awed. Tidings fitted to convulse all nations
      must henceforwards travel by culinary process; and the trumpet that once
      announced from afar the laurelled mail, heart-shaking when heard screaming
      on the wind and proclaiming itself through the darkness to every village
      or solitary house on its route, has now given way for ever to the
      pot-wallopings of the boiler. Thus have perished multiform openings for
      public expressions of interest, scenical yet natural, in great national
      tidings,&mdash;for revelations of faces and groups that could not offer
      themselves amongst the fluctuating mobs of a railway station. The
      gatherings of gazers about a laurelled mail had one centre, and
      acknowledged one sole interest. But the crowds attending at a railway
      station have as little unity as running water, and own as many centres as
      there are separate carriages in the train.
    </p>
    <p>
      How else, for example, than as a constant watcher for the dawn, and for
      the London mail that in summer months entered about daybreak amongst the
      lawny thickets of Maryborough forest, couldst thou, sweet Fanny of the
      Bath road, have become the glorified inmate of my dreams? Yet Fanny, as
      the loveliest young woman for face and person that perhaps in my whole
      life I have beheld, merited the station which even now, from a distance of
      forty years, she holds in my dreams; yes, though by links of natural
      association she brings along with her a troop of dreadful creatures,
      fabulous and not fabulous, that are more abominable to the heart than
      Fanny and the dawn are delightful.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Fanny of the Bath road, strictly speaking, lived at a mile's distance
      from that road, but came so continually to meet the mail that I on my
      frequent transits rarely missed her, and naturally connected her image
      with the great thoroughfare where only I had ever seen her. Why she came
      so punctually I do not exactly know; but I believe with some burden of
      commissions, to be executed in Bath, which had gathered to her own
      residence as a central rendezvous for converging them. The mail-coachman
      who drove the Bath mail and wore the royal livery [Footnote: "Wore the
      royal livery":&mdash;The general impression was that the royal livery
      belonged of right to the mail-coachmen as their professional dress. But
      that was an error. To the guard it <i>did</i> belong, I believe, and was
      obviously essential as an official warrant, and as a means of instant
      identification for his person, in the discharge of his important public
      duties. But the coachman, and especially if his place in the series did
      not connect him immediately with London and the General Post-Office,
      obtained the scarlet coat only as an honorary distinction after long (or,
      if not long, trying and special) service.] happened to be Fanny's
      grandfather. A good man he was, that loved his beautiful granddaughter,
      and, loving her wisely, was vigilant over her deportment in any case where
      young Oxford might happen to be concerned. Did my vanity then suggest that
      I myself, individually, could fall within the line of his terrors?
      Certainly not, as regarded any physical pretensions that I could plead;
      for Fanny (as a chance passenger from her own neighbourhood once told me)
      counted in her train a hundred and ninety-nine professed admirers, if not
      open aspirants to her favour; and probably not one of the whole brigade
      but excelled myself in personal advantages. Ulysses even, with the unfair
      advantage of his accursed bow, could hardly have undertaken that amount of
      suitors. So the danger might have seemed slight&mdash;only that woman is
      universally aristocratic; it is amongst her nobilities of heart that she
      <i>is</i> so. Now, the aristocratic distinctions in my favour might easily
      with Miss Fanny have compensated my physical deficiencies. Did I then make
      love to Fanny? Why, yes; about as much love as one <i>could</i> make
      whilst the mail was changing horses&mdash;a process which, ten years
      later, did not occupy above eighty seconds; but <i>then</i>,&mdash;viz.,
      about Waterloo&mdash;it occupied five times eighty. Now, four hundred
      seconds offer a field quite ample enough for whispering into a young
      woman's ear a great deal of truth, and (by way of parenthesis) some trifle
      of falsehood. Grandpapa did right, therefore, to watch me. And yet, as
      happens too often to the grandpapas of earth in a contest with the
      admirers of granddaughters, how vainly would he have watched me had I
      meditated any evil whispers to Fanny! She, it is my belief, would have
      protected herself against any man's evil suggestions. But he, as the
      result showed, could not have intercepted the opportunities for such
      suggestions. Yet, why not? Was he not active? Was he not blooming?
      Blooming he was as Fanny herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      "Say, all our praises why should lords&mdash;&mdash;"
    </p>
    <p>
      Stop, that's not the line.
    </p>
    <p>
      "Say, all our roses why should girls engross?"
    </p>
    <p>
      The coachman showed rosy blossoms on his face deeper even than his
      granddaughter's&mdash;<i>his</i> being drawn from the ale-cask, Fanny's
      from the fountains of the dawn. But, in spite of his blooming face, some
      infirmities he had; and one particularly in which he too much resembled a
      crocodile. This lay in a monstrous inaptitude for turning round. The
      crocodile, I presume, owes that inaptitude to the absurd <i>length</i> of
      his back; but in our grandpapa it arose rather from the absurd <i>breadth</i>
      of his back, combined, possibly, with some growing stiffness in his legs.
      Now, upon this crocodile infirmity of his I planted a human advantage for
      tendering my homage to Miss Fanny. In defiance of all his honourable
      vigilance, no sooner had he presented to us his mighty Jovian back (what a
      field for displaying to mankind his royal scarlet!), whilst inspecting
      professionally the buckles, the straps, and the silvery turrets [Footnote:
      "<i>Turrets</i>":&mdash;As one who loves and venerates Chaucer for his
      unrivalled merits of tenderness, of picturesque characterisation, and of
      narrative skill, I noticed with great pleasure that the word <i>torrettes</i>
      is used by him to designate the little devices through which the reins are
      made to pass. This same word, in the same exact sense, I heard uniformly
      used by many scores of illustrious mail-coachmen to whose confidential
      friendship I had the honour of being admitted in my younger days.] of his
      harness, than I raised Miss Fanny's hand to my lips, and, by the mixed
      tenderness and respectfulness of my manner, caused her easily to
      understand how happy it would make me to rank upon her list as No. 10 or
      12: in which case a few casualties amongst her lovers (and, observe, they
      <i>hanged</i> liberally in those days) might have promoted me speedily to
      the top of the tree; as, on the other hand, with how much loyalty of
      submission I acquiesced by anticipation in her award, supposing that she
      should plant me in the very rearward of her favour, as No. 199 + 1. Most
      truly I loved this beautiful and ingenuous girl; and, had it not been for
      the Bath mail, timing all courtships by post-office allowance, heaven only
      knows what might have come of it. People talk of being over head and ears
      in love; now, the mail was the cause that I sank only over ears in love,&mdash;which,
      you know, still left a trifle of brain to overlook the whole conduct of
      the affair.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, reader! when I look back upon those days, it seems to me that all
      things change&mdash;all things perish. "Perish the roses and the palms of
      kings": perish even the crowns and trophies of Waterloo: thunder and
      lightning are not the thunder and lightning which I remember. Roses are
      degenerating. The Fannies of our island&mdash;though this I say with
      reluctance&mdash;are not visibly improving; and the Bath road is
      notoriously superannuated. Crocodiles, you will say, are stationary. Mr.
      Waterton tells me that the crocodile does <i>not change</i>,&mdash;that a
      cayman, in fact, or an alligator, is just as good for riding upon as he
      was in the time of the Pharaohs. <i>That</i> may be; but the reason is
      that the crocodile does not live fast&mdash;he is a slow coach. I believe
      it is generally understood among naturalists that the crocodile is a
      blockhead. It is my own impression that the Pharaohs were also blockheads.
      Now, as the Pharaohs and the crocodile domineered over Egyptian society,
      this accounts for a singular mistake that prevailed through innumerable
      generations on the Nile. The crocodile made the ridiculous blunder of
      supposing man to be meant chiefly for his own eating. Man, taking a
      different view of the subject, naturally met that mistake by another: he
      viewed the crocodile as a thing sometimes to worship, but always to run
      away from. And this continued till Mr. Waterton [Footnote: "<i>Mr.
      Waterton</i>":&mdash;Had the reader lived through the last generation, he
      would not need to be told that, some thirty or thirty-five years back, Mr.
      Waterton, a distinguished country gentleman of ancient family in
      Northumberland, publicly mounted and rode in top-boots a savage old
      crocodile, that was restive and very impertinent, but all to no purpose.
      The crocodile jibbed and tried to kick, but vainly. He was no more able to
      throw the squire than Sinbad was to throw the old scoundrel who used his
      back without paying for it, until he discovered a mode (slightly immoral,
      perhaps, though some think not) of murdering the old fraudulent jockey,
      and so circuitously of unhorsing him.] changed the relations between the
      animals. The mode of escaping from the reptile he showed to be not by
      running away, but by leaping on its back booted and spurred. The two
      animals had misunderstood each other. The use of the crocodile has now
      been cleared up&mdash;viz., to be ridden; and the final cause of man is
      that he may improve the health of the crocodile by riding him
      a-fox-hunting before breakfast. And it is pretty certain that any
      crocodile who has been regularly hunted through the season, and is master
      of the weight he carries, will take a six-barred gate now as well as ever
      he would have done in the infancy of the pyramids.
    </p>
    <p>
      If, therefore, the crocodile does <i>not</i> change, all things else
      undeniably <i>do</i>: even the shadow of the pyramids grows less. And
      often the restoration in vision of Fanny and the Bath road makes me too
      pathetically sensible of that truth. Out of the darkness, if I happen to
      call back the image of Fanny, up rises suddenly from a gulf of forty years
      a rose in June; or, if I think for an instant of the rose in June, up
      rises the heavenly face of Fanny. One after the other, like the
      antiphonies in the choral service, rise Fanny and the rose in June, then
      back again the rose in June and Fanny. Then come both together, as in a
      chorus&mdash;roses and Fannies, Fannies and roses, without end, thick as
      blossoms in paradise. Then comes a venerable crocodile, in a royal livery
      of scarlet and gold, with sixteen capes; and the crocodile is driving
      four-in-hand from the box of the Bath mail. And suddenly we upon the mail
      are pulled up by a mighty dial, sculptured with the hours, that mingle
      with the heavens and the heavenly host. Then all at once we are arrived at
      Marlborough forest, amongst the lovely households [Footnote: "<i>Households</i>":&mdash;Roe-deer
      do not congregate in herds like the fallow or the red deer, but by
      separate families, parents and children; which feature of approximation to
      the sanctity of human hearths, added to their comparatively miniature and
      graceful proportions, conciliates to them an interest of peculiar
      tenderness, supposing even that this beautiful creature is less
      characteristically impressed with the grandeurs of savage and forest
      life.] of the roe-deer; the deer and their fawns retire into the dewy
      thickets; the thickets are rich with roses; once again the roses call up
      the sweet countenance of Fanny; and she, being the granddaughter of a
      crocodile, awakens a dreadful host of semi-legendary animals&mdash;griffins,
      dragons, basilisks, sphinxes&mdash;till at length the whole vision of
      fighting images crowds into one towering armorial shield, a vast
      emblazonry of human charities and human loveliness that have perished, but
      quartered heraldically with unutterable and demoniac natures, whilst over
      all rises, as a surmounting crest, one fair female hand, with the
      forefinger pointing, in sweet, sorrowful admonition, upwards to heaven,
      where is sculptured the eternal writing which proclaims the frailty of
      earth and her children.
    </p>
    <h3>
      GOING DOWN WITH VICTORY
    </h3>
    <p>
      But the grandest chapter of our experience within the whole mail-coach
      service was on those occasions when we went down from London with the news
      of victory. A period of about ten years stretched from Trafalgar to
      Waterloo; the second and third years of which period (1806 and 1807) were
      comparatively sterile; but the other nine (from 1805 to 1815 inclusively)
      furnished a long succession of victories, the least of which, in such a
      contest of Titans, had an inappreciable value of position: partly for its
      absolute interference with the plans of our enemy, but still more from its
      keeping alive through central Europe the sense of a deep-seated
      vulnerability in France. Even to tease the coasts of our enemy, to mortify
      them by continual blockades, to insult them by capturing if it were but a
      baubling schooner under the eyes of their arrogant armies, repeated from
      time to time a sullen proclamation of power lodged in one quarter to which
      the hopes of Christendom turned in secret. How much more loudly must this
      proclamation have spoken in the audacity [Footnote: "<i>Audacity</i>":&mdash;Such
      the French accounted it; and it has struck me that Soult would not have
      been so popular in London, at the period of her present Majesty's
      coronation, or in Manchester, on occasion of his visit to that town, if
      they had been aware of the insolence with which he spoke of us in notes
      written at intervals from the field of Waterloo. As though it had been
      mere felony in our army to look a French one in the face, he said in more
      notes than one, dated from two to four P.M. on the field of Waterloo,
      "Here are the English&mdash;we have them; they are caught <i>en flagrant
      délit</i>" Yet no man should have known us better; no man had drunk deeper
      from the cup of humiliation than Soult had in 1809, when ejected by us
      with headlong violence from Oporto, and pursued through a long line of
      wrecks to the frontier of Spain; and subsequently at Albuera, in the
      bloodiest of recorded battles, to say nothing of Toulouse, he should have
      learned our pretensions.] of having bearded the <i>élite</i> of their
      troops, and having beaten them in pitched battles! Five years of life it
      was worth paying down for the privilege of an outside place on a
      mail-coach, when carrying down the first tidings of any such event. And it
      is to be noted that, from our insular situation, and the multitude of our
      frigates disposable for the rapid transmission of intelligence, rarely did
      any unauthorised rumour steal away a prelibation from the first aroma of
      the regular despatches. The government news was generally the earliest
      news.
    </p>
    <p>
      From eight P.M. to fifteen or twenty minutes later imagine the mails
      assembled on parade in Lombard Street; where, at that time, [Footnote: "<i>At
      that time</i>":&mdash;I speak of the era previous to Waterloo.] and not in
      St. Martin's-le-Grand, was seated the General Post-Office. In what exact
      strength we mustered I do not remember; but, from the length of each
      separate <i>attelage</i>, we filled the street, though a long one, and
      though we were drawn up in double file. On <i>any</i> night the spectacle
      was beautiful. The absolute perfection of all the appointments about the
      carriages and the harness, their strength, their brilliant cleanliness,
      their beautiful simplicity&mdash;but, more than all, the royal
      magnificence of the horses&mdash;were what might first have fixed the
      attention. Every carriage on every morning in the year was taken down to
      an official inspector for examination: wheels, axles, linchpins, pole,
      glasses, lamps, were all critically probed and tested. Every part of every
      carriage had been cleaned, every horse had been groomed, with as much
      rigour as if they belonged to a private gentleman; and that part of the
      spectacle offered itself always. But the night before us is a night of
      victory; and, behold! to the ordinary display what a heart-shaking
      addition!&mdash;horses, men, carriages, all are dressed in laurels and
      flowers, oak-leaves and ribbons. The guards, as being officially his
      Majesty's servants, and of the coachmen such as are within the privilege
      of the post-office, wear the royal liveries of course; and, as it is
      summer (for all the <i>land</i> victories were naturally won in summer),
      they wear, on this fine evening, these liveries exposed to view, without
      any covering of upper coats. Such a costume, and the elaborate arrangement
      of the laurels in their hats, dilate their hearts, by giving to them
      openly a personal connexion with the great news in which already they have
      the general interest of patriotism. That great national sentiment
      surmounts and quells all sense of ordinary distinctions. Those passengers
      who happen to be gentlemen are now hardly to be distinguished as such
      except by dress; for the usual reserve of their manner in speaking to the
      attendants has on this night melted away. One heart, one pride, one glory,
      connects every man by the transcendent bond of his national blood. The
      spectators, who are numerous beyond precedent, express their sympathy with
      these fervent feelings by continual hurrahs. Every moment are shouted
      aloud by the post-office servants, and summoned to draw up, the great
      ancestral names of cities known to history through a thousand years&mdash;Lincoln,
      Winchester, Portsmouth, Gloucester, Oxford, Bristol, Manchester, York,
      Newcastle, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Perth, Stirling, Aberdeen&mdash;expressing
      the grandeur of the empire by the antiquity of its towns, and the grandeur
      of the mail establishment by the diffusive radiation of its separate
      missions. Every moment you hear the thunder of lids locked down upon the
      mail-bags. That sound to each individual mail is the signal for drawing
      off; which process is the finest part of the entire spectacle. Then come
      the horses into play. Horses! can these be horses that bound off with the
      action and gestures of leopards? What stir!&mdash;what sea-like ferment!&mdash;what
      a thundering of wheels!&mdash;what a trampling of hoofs!&mdash;what a
      sounding of trumpets!&mdash;what farewell cheers&mdash;what redoubling
      peals of brotherly congratulation, connecting the name of the particular
      mail&mdash;"Liverpool for ever!"&mdash;with the name of the particular
      victory&mdash;"Badajoz for ever!" or "Salamanca for ever!" The
      half-slumbering consciousness that all night long, and all the next day&mdash;perhaps
      for even a longer period&mdash;many of these mails, like fire racing along
      a train of gunpowder, will be kindling at every instant new successions of
      burning joy, has an obscure effect of multiplying the victory itself, by
      multiplying to the imagination into infinity the stages of its progressive
      diffusion. A fiery arrow seems to be let loose, which from that moment is
      destined to travel, without intermission, westwards for three hundred
      [Footnote: "<i>Three hundred</i>":&mdash;Of necessity, this scale of
      measurement, to an American, if he happens to be a thoughtless man, must
      sound ludicrous. Accordingly, I remember a case in which an American
      writer indulges himself in the luxury of a little fibbing, by ascribing to
      an Englishman a pompous account of the Thames, constructed entirely upon
      American ideas of grandeur, and concluding in something like these terms:&mdash;"And,
      sir, arriving at London, this mighty father of rivers attains a breadth of
      at least two furlongs, having, in its winding course, traversed the
      astonishing distance of one hundred and seventy miles." And this the
      candid American thinks it fair to contrast with the scale of the
      Mississippi. Now, it is hardly worth while to answer a pure fiction
      gravely; else one might say that no Englishman out of Bedlam ever thought
      of looking in an island for the rivers of a continent, nor, consequently,
      could have thought of looking for the peculiar grandeur of the Thames in
      the length of its course, or in the extent of soil which it drains. Yet,
      if he <i>had</i> been so absurd, the American might have recollected that
      a river, not to be compared with the Thames even as to volume of water&mdash;viz.,
      the Tiber&mdash;has contrived to make itself heard of in this world for
      twenty-five centuries to an extent not reached as yet by any river,
      however corpulent, of his own land. The glory of the Thames is measured by
      the destiny of the population to which it ministers, by the commerce which
      it supports, by the grandeur of the empire in which, though far from the
      largest, it is the most influential stream. Upon some such scale, and not
      by a transfer of Columbian standards, is the course of our English mails
      to be valued. The American may fancy the effect of his own valuations to
      our English ears by supposing the case of a Siberian glorifying his
      country in these terms:&mdash;"These wretches, sir, in France and England,
      cannot march half a mile in any direction without finding a house where
      food can be had and lodging; whereas such is the noble desolation of our
      magnificent country that in many a direction for a thousand miles I will
      engage that a dog shall not find shelter from a snow-storm, nor a wren
      find an apology for breakfast."] miles&mdash;northwards for six hundred;
      and the sympathy of our Lombard Street friends at parting is exalted a
      hundredfold by a sort of visionary sympathy with the yet slumbering
      sympathies which in so vast a succession we are going to awake.
    </p>
    <p>
      Liberated from the embarrassments of the city, and issuing into the broad
      uncrowded avenues of the northern suburbs, we soon begin to enter upon our
      natural pace of ten miles an hour. In the broad light of the summer
      evening, the sun, perhaps, only just at the point of setting, we are seen
      from every storey of every house. Heads of every age crowd to the windows;
      young and old understand the language of our victorious symbols; and
      rolling volleys of sympathising cheers run along us, behind us, and before
      us. The beggar, rearing himself against the wall, forgets his lameness&mdash;real
      or assumed&mdash;thinks not of his whining trade, but stands erect, with
      bold exulting smiles, as we pass him. The victory has healed him, and
      says, Be thou whole! Women and children, from garrets alike and cellars,
      through infinite London, look down or look up with loving eyes upon our
      gay ribbons and our martial laurels; sometimes kiss their hands; sometimes
      hang out, as signals of affection, pocket-handkerchiefs, aprons, dusters,
      anything that, by catching the summer breezes, will express an aerial
      jubilation. On the London side of Barnet, to which we draw near within a
      few minutes after nine, observe that private carriage which is approaching
      us. The weather being so warm, the glasses are all down; and one may read,
      as on the stage of a theatre, everything that goes on within. It contains
      three ladies&mdash;one likely to be "mamma," and two of seventeen or
      eighteen, who are probably her daughters. What lovely animation, what
      beautiful unpremeditated pantomime, explaining to us every syllable that
      passes, in these ingenuous girls! By the sudden start and raising of the
      hands on first discovering our laurelled equipage, by the sudden movement
      and appeal to the elder lady from both of them, and by the heightened
      colour on their animated countenances, we can almost hear them saying,
      "See, see! Look at their laurels! Oh, mamma! there has been a great battle
      in Spain; and it has been a great victory." In a moment we are on the
      point of passing them. We passengers&mdash;I on the box, and the two on
      the roof behind me&mdash;raise our hats to the ladies; the coachman makes
      his professional salute with the whip; the guard even, though punctilious
      on the matter of his dignity as an officer under the crown, touches his
      hat. The ladies move to us, in return, with a winning graciousness of
      gesture; all smile on each side in a way that nobody could misunderstand,
      and that nothing short of a grand national sympathy could so
      instantaneously prompt. Will these ladies say that we are nothing to <i>them</i>?
      Oh no; they will not say <i>that</i>. They cannot deny&mdash;they do not
      deny&mdash;that for this night they are our sisters; gentle or simple,
      scholar or illiterate servant, for twelve hours to come, we on the outside
      have the honour to be their brothers. Those poor women, again, who stop to
      gaze upon us with delight at the entrance of Barnet, and seem, by their
      air of weariness, to be returning from labour&mdash;do you mean to say
      that they are washerwomen and charwomen? Oh, my poor friend, you are quite
      mistaken. I assure you they stand in a far higher rank; for this one night
      they feel themselves by birthright to be daughters of England, and answer
      to no humbler title.
    </p>
    <p>
      Every joy, however, even rapturous joy&mdash;such is the sad law of earth&mdash;may
      carry with it grief, or fear of grief, to some. Three miles beyond Barnet,
      we see approaching us another private carriage, nearly repeating the
      circumstances of the former case. Here, also, the glasses are all down;
      here, also, is an elderly lady seated; but the two daughters are missing;
      for the single young person sitting by the lady's side seems to be an
      attendant&mdash;so I judge from her dress, and her air of respectful
      reserve. The lady is in mourning; and her countenance expresses sorrow. At
      first she does not look up; so that I believe she is not aware of our
      approach, until she hears the measured beating of our horses' hoofs. Then
      she raises her eyes to settle them painfully on our triumphal equipage.
      Our decorations explain the case to her at once; but she beholds them with
      apparent anxiety, or even with terror. Some time before this, I, finding
      it difficult to hit a flying mark when embarrassed by the coachman's
      person and reins intervening, had given to the guard a "Courier" evening
      paper, containing the gazette, for the next carriage that might pass.
      Accordingly he tossed it in, so folded that the huge capitals expressing
      some such legend as GLORIOUS VICTORY might catch the eye at once. To see
      the paper, however, at all, interpreted as it was by our ensigns of
      triumph, explained everything; and, if the guard were right in thinking
      the lady to have received it with a gesture of horror, it could not be
      doubtful that she had suffered some deep personal affliction in connexion
      with this Spanish war.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here, now, was the case of one who, having formerly suffered, might,
      erroneously perhaps, be distressing herself with anticipations of another
      similar suffering. That same night, and hardly three hours later, occurred
      the reverse case. A poor woman, who too probably would find herself, in a
      day or two, to have suffered the heaviest of afflictions by the battle,
      blindly allowed herself to express an exultation so unmeasured in the news
      and its details as gave to her the appearance which amongst Celtic
      Highlanders is called <i>fey</i>. This was at some little town where we
      changed horses an hour or two after midnight. Some fair or wake had kept
      the people up out of their beds, and had occasioned a partial illumination
      of the stalls and booths, presenting an unusual but very impressive
      effect. We saw many lights moving about as we drew near; and perhaps the
      most striking scene on the whole route was our reception at this place.
      The flashing of torches and the beautiful radiance of blue lights
      (technically, Bengal lights) upon the heads of our horses; the fine effect
      of such a showery and ghostly illumination falling upon our flowers and
      glittering laurels [Footnote: "<i>Glittering laurels</i>":&mdash;I must
      observe that the colour of <i>green</i> suffers almost a spiritual change
      and exaltation under the effect of Bengal lights.]; whilst all around
      ourselves, that formed a centre of light, the darkness gathered on the
      rear and flanks in massy blackness: these optical splendours, together
      with the prodigious enthusiasm of the people, composed a picture at once
      scenical and affecting, theatrical and holy. As we staid for three or four
      minutes, I alighted; and immediately from a dismantled stall in the
      street, where no doubt she had been presiding through the earlier part of
      the night, advanced eagerly a middle-aged woman. The sight of my newspaper
      it was that had drawn her attention upon myself. The victory which we were
      carrying down to the provinces on <i>this</i> occasion was the imperfect
      one of Talavera&mdash;imperfect for its results, such was the virtual
      treachery of the Spanish general, Cuesta, but not imperfect in its
      ever-memorable heroism. I told her the main outline of the battle. The
      agitation of her enthusiasm had been so conspicuous when listening, and
      when first applying for information, that I could not but ask her if she
      had not some relative in the Peninsular army. Oh yes; her only son was
      there. In what regiment? He was a trooper in the 23d Dragoons. My heart
      sank within me as she made that answer. This sublime regiment, which an
      Englishman should never mention without raising his hat to their memory,
      had made the most memorable and effective charge recorded in military
      annals. They leaped their horses&mdash;<i>over</i> a trench where they
      could; <i>into</i> it, and with the result of death or mutilation, when
      they could <i>not</i>. What proportion cleared the trench is nowhere
      stated. Those who <i>did</i> closed up and went down upon the enemy with
      such divinity of fervour (I use the word <i>divinity</i> by design: the
      inspiration of God must have prompted this movement for those whom even
      then He was calling to His presence) that two results followed. As
      regarded the enemy, this 23d Dragoons, not, I believe, originally three
      hundred and fifty strong, paralysed a French column six thousand strong,
      then ascended the hill, and fixed the gaze of the whole French army. As
      regarded themselves, the 23d were supposed at first to have been barely
      not annihilated; but eventually, I believe, about one in four survived.
      And this, then, was the regiment&mdash;a regiment already for some hours
      glorified and hallowed to the ear of all London, as lying stretched, by a
      large majority, upon one bloody aceldama&mdash;in which the young trooper
      served whose mother was now talking in a spirit of such joyous enthusiasm.
      Did I tell her the truth? Had I the heart to break up her dreams? No.
      To-morrow, said I to myself&mdash;to-morrow, or the next day, will publish
      the worst. For one night more wherefore should she not sleep in peace?
      After to-morrow the chances are too many that peace will forsake her
      pillow. This brief respite, then, let her owe to <i>my</i> gift and <i>my</i>
      forbearance. But, if I told her not of the bloody price that had been
      paid, not therefore was I silent on the contributions from her son's
      regiment to that day's service and glory. I showed her not the funeral
      banners under which the noble regiment was sleeping. I lifted not the
      overshadowing laurels from the bloody trench in which horse and rider lay
      mangled together. But I told her how these dear children of England,
      officers and privates, had leaped their horses over all obstacles as gaily
      as hunters to the morning's chase. I told her how they rode their horses
      into the midst of death,&mdash;saying to myself, but not saying to <i>her</i>
      "and laid down their young lives for thee, O mother England! as willingly&mdash;poured
      out their noble blood as cheerfully&mdash;as ever, after a long day's
      sport, when infants, they had rested their weary heads upon their mother's
      knees, or had sunk to sleep in her arms." Strange it is, yet true, that
      she seemed to have no fears for her son's safety, even after this
      knowledge that the 23d Dragoons had been memorably engaged; but so much
      was she enraptured by the knowledge that <i>his</i> regiment, and
      therefore that <i>he</i>, had rendered conspicuous service in the dreadful
      conflict&mdash;a service which had actually made them, within the last
      twelve hours, the foremost topic of conversation in London&mdash;so
      absolutely was fear swallowed up in joy&mdash;that, in the mere simplicity
      of her fervent nature, the poor woman threw her arms round my neck, as she
      thought of her son, and gave to <i>me</i> the kiss which secretly was
      meant for <i>him</i>.
    </p>
    <p>
      <br /><br />
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_SECT2" id="link2H_SECT2"> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      SECTION II&mdash;THE VISION OF SUDDEN DEATH
    </h2>
    <p>
      What is to be taken as the predominant opinion of man, reflective and
      philosophic, upon SUDDEN DEATH? It is remarkable that, in different
      conditions of society, sudden death has been variously regarded as the
      consummation of an earthly career most fervently to be desired, or, again,
      as that consummation which is with most horror to be deprecated. Cæsar the
      Dictator, at his last dinner-party (<i>coena</i>), on the very evening
      before his assassination, when the minutes of his earthly career were
      numbered, being asked what death, in <i>his</i> judgment, might be
      pronounced the most eligible, replied "That which should be most sudden."
      On the other hand, the divine Litany of our English Church, when breathing
      forth supplications, as if in some representative character, for the whole
      human race prostrate before God, places such a death in the very van of
      horrors: "From lightning and tempest; from plague, pestilence, and famine;
      from battle and murder, and from SUDDEN DEATH&mdash;<i>Good Lord, deliver
      us</i>." Sudden death is here made to crown the climax in a grand ascent
      of calamities; it is ranked among the last of curses; and yet by the
      noblest of Romans it was ranked as the first of blessings. In that
      difference most readers will see little more than the essential difference
      between Christianity and Paganism. But this, on consideration, I doubt.
      The Christian Church may be right in its estimate of sudden death; and it
      is a natural feeling, though after all it may also be an infirm one, to
      wish for a quiet dismissal from life, as that which <i>seems</i> most
      reconcilable with meditation, with penitential retrospects, and with the
      humilities of farewell prayer. There does not, however, occur to me any
      direct scriptural warrant for this earnest petition of the English Litany,
      unless under a special construction of the word "sudden." It seems a
      petition indulged rather and conceded to human infirmity than exacted from
      human piety. It is not so much a doctrine built upon the eternities of the
      Christian system as a plausible opinion built upon special varieties of
      physical temperament. Let that, however, be as it may, two remarks suggest
      themselves as prudent restraints upon a doctrine which else <i>may</i>
      wander, and <i>has</i> wandered, into an uncharitable superstition. The
      first is this: that many people are likely to exaggerate the horror of a
      sudden death from the disposition to lay a false stress upon words or acts
      simply because by an accident they have become <i>final</i> words or acts.
      If a man dies, for instance, by some sudden death when he happens to be
      intoxicated, such a death is falsely regarded with peculiar horror; as
      though the intoxication were suddenly exalted into a blasphemy. But <i>that</i>
      is unphilosophic. The man was, or he was not, <i>habitually</i> a
      drunkard. If not, if his intoxication were a solitary accident, there can
      be no reason for allowing special emphasis to this act simply because
      through misfortune it became his final act. Nor, on the other hand, if it
      were no accident, but one of his <i>habitual</i> transgressions, will it
      be the more habitual or the more a transgression because some sudden
      calamity, surprising him, has caused this habitual transgression to be
      also a final one. Could the man have had any reason even dimly to foresee
      his own sudden death, there would have been a new feature in his act of
      intemperance&mdash;a feature of presumption and irreverence, as in one
      that, having known himself drawing near to the presence of God, should
      have suited his demeanour to an expectation so awful. But this is no part
      of the case supposed. And the only new element in the man's act is not any
      element of special immorality, but simply of special misfortune.
    </p>
    <p>
      The other remark has reference to the meaning of the word <i>sudden</i>.
      Very possibly Cæsar and the Christian Church do not differ in the way
      supposed,&mdash;that is, do not differ by any difference of doctrine as
      between Pagan and Christian views of the moral temper appropriate to
      death; but perhaps they are contemplating different cases. Both
      contemplate a violent death, a <i>Biathanatos</i>&mdash;death that is <i>biaios</i>,
      or, in other words, death that is brought about, not by internal and
      spontaneous change, but by active force having its origin from without. In
      this meaning the two authorities agree. Thus far they are in harmony. But
      the difference is that the Roman by the word "sudden" means <i>unlingering</i>,
      whereas the Christian Litany by "sudden death" means a death <i>without
      warning</i>, consequently without any available summons to religious
      preparation. The poor mutineer who kneels down to gather into his heart
      the bullets from twelve firelocks of his pitying comrades dies by a most
      sudden death in Cæsar's sense; one shock, one mighty spasm, one (possibly
      <i>not</i> one) groan, and all is over. But, in the sense of the Litany,
      the mutineer's death is far from sudden: his offence originally, his
      imprisonment, his trial, the interval between his sentence and its
      execution, having all furnished him with separate warnings of his fate&mdash;having
      all summoned him to meet it with solemn preparation.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here at once, in this sharp verbal distinction, we comprehend the faithful
      earnestness with which a holy Christian Church pleads on behalf of her
      poor departing children that God would vouchsafe to them the last great
      privilege and distinction possible on a death-bed, viz., the opportunity
      of untroubled preparation for facing this mighty trial. Sudden death, as a
      mere variety in the modes of dying where death in some shape is
      inevitable, proposes a question of choice which, equally in the Roman and
      the Christian sense, will be variously answered according to each man's
      variety of temperament. Meantime, one aspect of sudden death there is, one
      modification, upon which no doubt can arise, that of all martyrdoms it is
      the most agitating&mdash;viz., where it surprises a man under
      circumstances which offer (or which seem to offer) some hurrying, flying,
      inappreciably minute chance of evading it. Sudden as the danger which it
      affronts must be any effort by which such an evasion can be accomplished.
      Even <i>that</i>, even the sickening necessity for hurrying in extremity
      where all hurry seems destined to be vain,&mdash;even that anguish is
      liable to a hideous exasperation in one particular case: viz., where the
      appeal is made not exclusively to the instinct of self-preservation, but
      to the conscience, on behalf of some other life besides your own,
      accidentally thrown upon <i>your</i> protection. To fail, to collapse in a
      service merely your own, might seem comparatively venial; though, in fact,
      it is far from venial. But to fail in a case where Providence has suddenly
      thrown into your hands the final interests of another,&mdash;a fellow
      creature shuddering between the gates of life and death: this, to a man of
      apprehensive conscience, would mingle the misery of an atrocious
      criminality with the misery of a bloody calamity. You are called upon, by
      the case supposed, possibly to die, but to die at the very moment when, by
      any even partial failure or effeminate collapse of your energies, you will
      be self-denounced as a murderer. You had but the twinkling of an eye for
      your effort, and that effort might have been unavailing; but to have risen
      to the level of such an effort would have rescued you, though not from
      dying, yet from dying as a traitor to your final and farewell duty.
    </p>
    <p>
      The situation here contemplated exposes a dreadful ulcer, lurking far down
      in the depths of human nature. It is not that men generally are summoned
      to face such awful trials. But potentially, and in shadowy outline, such a
      trial is moving subterraneously in perhaps all men's natures. Upon the
      secret mirror of our dreams such a trial is darkly projected, perhaps, to
      every one of us. That dream, so familiar to childhood, of meeting a lion,
      and, through languishing prostration in hope and the energies of hope,
      that constant sequel of lying down before the lion publishes the secret
      frailty of human nature&mdash;reveals its deep-seated falsehood to itself&mdash;records
      its abysmal treachery. Perhaps not one of us escapes that dream; perhaps,
      as by some sorrowful doom of man, that dream repeats for every one of us,
      through every generation, the original temptation in Eden. Every one of
      us, in this dream, has a bait offered to the infirm places of his own
      individual will; once again a snare is presented for tempting him into
      captivity to a luxury of ruin; once again, as in aboriginal Paradise, the
      man falls by his own choice; again, by infinite iteration, the ancient
      earth groans to Heaven, through her secret caves, over the weakness of her
      child. "Nature, from her seat, sighing through all her works," again
      "gives signs of woe that all is lost"; and again the counter-sigh is
      repeated to the sorrowing heavens for the endless rebellion against God.
      It is not without probability that in the world of dreams every one of us
      ratifies for himself the original transgression. In dreams, perhaps under
      some secret conflict of the midnight sleeper, lighted up to the
      consciousness at the time, but darkened to the memory as soon as all is
      finished, each several child of our mysterious race completes for himself
      the treason of the aboriginal fall.
    </p>
    <p>
      The incident, so memorable in itself by its features of horror, and so
      scenical by its grouping for the eye, which furnished the text for this
      reverie upon <i>Sudden Death</i> occurred to myself in the dead of night,
      as a solitary spectator, when seated on the box of the Manchester and
      Glasgow mail, in the second or third summer after Waterloo. I find it
      necessary to relate the circumstances, because they are such as could not
      have occurred unless under a singular combination of accidents. In those
      days, the oblique and lateral communications with many rural post-offices
      were so arranged, either through necessity or through defect of system, as
      to make it requisite for the main north-western mail (<i>i.e.</i>, the <i>down</i>
      mail) on reaching Manchester to halt for a number of hours; how many, I do
      not remember; six or seven, I think; but the result was that, in the
      ordinary course, the mail recommenced its journey northwards about
      midnight. Wearied with the long detention at a gloomy hotel, I walked out
      about eleven o'clock at night for the sake of fresh air; meaning to fall
      in with the mail and resume my seat at the post-office. The night,
      however, being yet dark, as the moon had scarcely risen, and the streets
      being at that hour empty, so as to offer no opportunities for asking the
      road, I lost my way, and did not reach the post-office until it was
      considerably past midnight; but, to my great relief (as it was important
      for me to be in Westmoreland by the morning), I saw in the huge saucer
      eyes of the mail, blazing through the gloom, an evidence that my chance
      was not yet lost. Past the time it was; but, by some rare accident, the
      mail was not even yet ready to start. I ascended to my seat on the box,
      where my cloak was still lying as it had lain at the Bridgewater Arms. I
      had left it there in imitation of a nautical discoverer, who leaves a bit
      of bunting on the shore of his discovery, by way of warning off the ground
      the whole human race, and notifying to the Christian and the heathen
      worlds, with his best compliments, that he has hoisted his
      pocket-handkerchief once and for ever upon that virgin soil: thenceforward
      claiming the <i>jus dominii</i> to the top of the atmosphere above it, and
      also the right of driving shafts to the centre of the earth below it; so
      that all people found after this warning either aloft in upper chambers of
      the atmosphere, or groping in subterraneous shafts, or squatting
      audaciously on the surface of the soil, will be treated as trespassers&mdash;kicked,
      that is to say, or decapitated, as circumstances may suggest, by their
      very faithful servant, the owner of the said pocket-handkerchief. In the
      present case, it is probable that my cloak might not have been respected,
      and the <i>jus gentium</i> might have been cruelly violated in my person&mdash;for,
      in the dark, people commit deeds of darkness, gas being a great ally of
      morality; but it so happened that on this night there was no other outside
      passenger; and thus the crime, which else was but too probable, missed
      fire for want of a criminal.
    </p>
    <p>
      Having mounted the box, I took a small quantity of laudanum, having
      already travelled two hundred and fifty miles&mdash;viz., from a point
      seventy miles beyond London. In the taking of laudanum there was nothing
      extraordinary. But by accident it drew upon me the special attention of my
      assessor on the box, the coachman. And in <i>that</i> also there was
      nothing extraordinary. But by accident, and with great delight, it drew my
      own attention to the fact that this coachman was a monster in point of
      bulk, and that he had but one eye. In fact, he had been foretold by Virgil
      as
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  "Monstrum horrendum, informe, ingens, cui lumen ademptum."
</pre>
    <p>
      He answered to the conditions in every one of the items:&mdash;1, a
      monster he was; 2, dreadful; 3, shapeless; 4, huge; 5, who had lost an
      eye. But why should <i>that</i> delight me? Had he been one of the
      Calendars in the "Arabian Nights," and had paid down his eye as the price
      of his criminal curiosity, what right had <i>I</i> to exult in his
      misfortune? I did <i>not</i> exult; I delighted in no man's punishment,
      though it were even merited. But these personal distinctions (Nos. 1, 2,
      3, 4, 5) identified in an instant an old friend of mine whom I had known
      in the south for some years as the most masterly of mail-coachmen. He was
      the man in all Europe that could (if <i>any</i> could) have driven
      six-in-hand full gallop over <i>Al Sirat</i>&mdash;that dreadful bridge of
      Mahomet, with no side battlements, and of <i>extra</i> room not enough for
      a razor's edge&mdash;leading right across the bottomless gulf. Under this
      eminent man, whom in Greek I cognominated Cyclops <i>Diphrélates</i>
      (Cyclops the Charioteer), I, and others known to me, studied the
      diphrelatic art. Excuse, reader, a word too elegant to be pedantic. As a
      pupil, though I paid extra fees, it is to be lamented that I did not stand
      high in his esteem. It showed his dogged honesty (though, observe, not his
      discernment) that he could not see my merits. Let us excuse his absurdity
      in this particular by remembering his want of an eye. Doubtless <i>that</i>
      made him blind to my merits. In the art of conversation, however, he
      admitted that I had the whip-hand of him. On the present occasion great
      joy was at our meeting. But what was Cyclops doing here? Had the medical
      men recommended northern air, or how? I collected, from such explanations
      as he volunteered, that he had an interest at stake in some suit-at-law
      now pending at Lancaster; so that probably he had got himself transferred
      to this station for the purpose of connecting with his professional
      pursuits an instant readiness for the calls of his lawsuit.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meantime, what are we stopping for? Surely we have now waited long enough.
      Oh, this procrastinating mail, and this procrastinating post-office! Can't
      they take a lesson upon that subject from <i>me</i>? Some people have
      called <i>me</i> procrastinating. Yet you are witness, reader, that I was
      here kept waiting for the post-office. Will the post-office lay its hand
      on its heart, in its moments of sobriety, and assert that ever it waited
      for me? What are they about? The guard tells me that there is a large
      extra accumulation of foreign mails this night, owing to irregularities
      caused by war, by wind, by weather, in the packet service, which as yet
      does not benefit at all by steam. For an <i>extra</i> hour, it seems, the
      post-office has been engaged in threshing out the pure wheaten
      correspondence of Glasgow, and winnowing it from the chaff of all baser
      intermediate towns. But at last all is finished. Sound your horn, guard!
      Manchester, good-bye! we've lost an hour by your criminal conduct at the
      post-office: which, however, though I do not mean to part with a
      serviceable ground of complaint, and one which really <i>is</i> such for
      the horses, to me secretly is an advantage, since it compels us to look
      sharply for this lost hour amongst the next eight or nine, and to recover
      it (if we can) at the rate of one mile extra per hour. Off we are at last,
      and at eleven miles an hour; and for the moment I detect no changes in the
      energy or in the skill of Cyclops.
    </p>
    <p>
      From Manchester to Kendal, which virtually (though not in law) is the
      capital of Westmoreland, there were at this time seven stages of eleven
      miles each. The first five of these, counting from Manchester, terminate
      in Lancaster; which is therefore fifty-five miles north of Manchester, and
      the same distance exactly from Liverpool. The first three stages terminate
      in Preston (called, by way of distinction from other towns of that name,
      <i>Proud</i> Preston); at which place it is that the separate roads from
      Liverpool and from Manchester to the north become confluent. [Footnote: "<i>Confluent</i>":&mdash;Suppose
      a capital Y (the Pythagorean letter): Lancaster is at the foot of this
      letter; Liverpool at the top of the <i>right</i> branch; Manchester at the
      top of the <i>left</i>; Proud Preston at the centre, where the two
      branches unite. It is thirty-three miles along either of the two branches;
      it is twenty-two miles along the stem,&mdash;viz., from Preston in the
      middle to Lancaster at the root. There's a lesson in geography for the
      reader!] Within these first three stages lay the foundation, the progress,
      and termination of our night's adventure. During the first stage, I found
      out that Cyclops was mortal: he was liable to the shocking affection of
      sleep&mdash;a thing which previously I had never suspected. If a man
      indulges in the vicious habit of sleeping, all the skill in aurigation of
      Apollo himself, with the horses of Aurora to execute his notions, avails
      him nothing. "Oh, Cyclops!" I exclaimed, "thou art mortal. My friend, thou
      snorest." Through the first eleven miles, however, this infirmity&mdash;which
      I grieve to say that he shared with the whole Pagan Pantheon&mdash;betrayed
      itself only by brief snatches. On waking up, he made an apology for
      himself which, instead of mending matters, laid open a gloomy vista of
      coming disasters. The summer assizes, he reminded me, were now going on at
      Lancaster: in consequence of which for three nights and three days he had
      not lain down on a bed. During the day he was waiting for his own summons
      as a witness on the trial in which he was interested, or else, lest he
      should be missing at the critical moment, was drinking with the other
      witnesses under the pastoral surveillance of the attorneys. During the
      night, or that part of it which at sea would form the middle watch, he was
      driving. This explanation certainly accounted for his drowsiness, but in a
      way which made it much more alarming; since now, after several days'
      resistance to this infirmity, at length he was steadily giving way.
      Throughout the second stage he grew more and more drowsy. In the second
      mile of the third stage he surrendered himself finally and without a
      struggle to his perilous temptation. All his past resistance had but
      deepened the weight of this final oppression. Seven atmospheres of sleep
      rested upon him; and, to consummate the case, our worthy guard, after
      singing "Love amongst the Roses" for perhaps thirty times, without
      invitation and without applause, had in revenge moodily resigned himself
      to slumber&mdash;not so deep, doubtless, as the coachman's, but deep
      enough for mischief. And thus at last, about ten miles from Preston, it
      came about that I found myself left in charge of his Majesty's London and
      Glasgow mail, then running at the least twelve miles an hour.
    </p>
    <p>
      What made this negligence less criminal than else it must have been
      thought was the condition of the roads at night during the assizes. At
      that time, all the law business of populous Liverpool, and also of
      populous Manchester, with its vast cincture of populous rural districts,
      was called up by ancient usage to the tribunal of Lilliputian Lancaster.
      To break up this old traditional usage required, 1, a conflict with
      powerful established interests, 2, a large system of new arrangements, and
      3, a new parliamentary statute. But as yet this change was merely in
      contemplation. As things were at present, twice in the year [Footnote: "<i>Twice
      in the year</i>":&mdash;There were at that time only two assizes even in
      the most populous counties&mdash;viz., the Lent Assizes and the Summer
      Assizes.] so vast a body of business rolled northwards from the southern
      quarter of the county that for a fortnight at least it occupied the severe
      exertions of two judges in its despatch. The consequence of this was that
      every horse available for such a service, along the whole line of road,
      was exhausted in carrying down the multitudes of people who were parties
      to the different suits. By sunset, therefore, it usually happened that,
      through utter exhaustion amongst men and horses, the road sank into
      profound silence. Except the exhaustion in the vast adjacent county of
      York from a contested election, no such silence succeeding to no such
      fiery uproar was ever witnessed in England.
    </p>
    <p>
      On this occasion the usual silence and solitude prevailed along the road.
      Not a hoof nor a wheel was to be heard. And, to strengthen this false
      luxurious confidence in the noiseless roads, it happened also that the
      night was one of peculiar solemnity and peace. For my own part, though
      slightly alive to the possibilities of peril, I had so far yielded to the
      influence of the mighty calm as to sink into a profound reverie. The month
      was August; in the middle of which lay my own birthday&mdash;a festival to
      every thoughtful man suggesting solemn and often sigh-born [Footnote: "<i>Sigh-born</i>":&mdash;I
      owe the suggestion of this word to an obscure remembrance of a beautiful
      phrase in "Giraldus Cambrensis"&mdash;viz., <i>suspiriosæ cogitationes</i>.]
      thoughts. The county was my own native county&mdash;upon which, in its
      southern section, more than upon any equal area known to man past or
      present, had descended the original curse of labour in its heaviest form,
      not mastering the bodies only of men, as of slaves, or criminals in mines,
      but working through the fiery will. Upon no equal space of earth was, or
      ever had been, the same energy of human power put forth daily. At this
      particular season also of the assizes, that dreadful hurricane of flight
      and pursuit, as it might have seemed to a stranger, which swept to and
      from Lancaster all day long, hunting the county up and down, and regularly
      subsiding back into silence about sunset, could not fail (when united with
      this permanent distinction of Lancashire as the very metropolis and
      citadel of labour) to point the thoughts pathetically upon that
      counter-vision of rest, of saintly repose from strife and sorrow, towards
      which, as to their secret haven, the profounder aspirations of man's heart
      are in solitude continually travelling. Obliquely upon our left we were
      nearing the sea; which also must, under the present circumstances, be
      repeating the general state of halcyon repose. The sea, the atmosphere,
      the light, bore each an orchestral part in this universal lull. Moonlight
      and the first timid tremblings of the dawn were by this time blending; and
      the blendings were brought into a still more exquisite state of unity by a
      slight silvery mist, motionless and dreamy, that covered the woods and
      fields, but with a veil of equable transparency. Except the feet of our
      own horses,&mdash;which, running on a sandy margin of the road, made but
      little disturbance,&mdash;there was no sound abroad. In the clouds and on
      the earth prevailed the same majestic peace; and, in spite of all that the
      villain of a schoolmaster has done for the ruin of our sublimer thoughts,
      which are the thoughts of our infancy, we still believe in no such
      nonsense as a limited atmosphere. Whatever we may swear with our false
      feigning lips, in our faithful hearts we still believe, and must for ever
      believe, in fields of air traversing the total gulf between earth and the
      central heavens. Still, in the confidence of children that tread without
      fear every chamber in their father's house, and to whom no door is closed,
      we, in that Sabbatic vision which sometimes is revealed for an hour upon
      nights like this, ascend with easy steps from the sorrow-stricken fields
      of earth upwards to the sandals of God.
    </p>
    <p>
      Suddenly, from thoughts like these I was awakened to a sullen sound, as of
      some motion on the distant road. It stole upon the air for a moment; I
      listened in awe; but then it died away. Once roused, however, I could not
      but observe with alarm the quickened motion of our horses. Ten years'
      experience had made my eye learned in the valuing of motion; and I saw
      that we were now running thirteen miles an hour. I pretend to no presence
      of mind. On the contrary, my fear is that I am miserably and shamefully
      deficient in that quality as regards action. The palsy of doubt and
      distraction hangs like some guilty weight of dark unfathomed remembrances
      upon my energies when the signal is flying for <i>action</i>. But, on the
      other hand, this accursed gift I have, as regards <i>thought</i>, that in
      the first step towards the possibility of a misfortune I see its total
      evolution; in the radix of the series I see too certainly and too
      instantly its entire expansion; in the first syllable of the dreadful
      sentence I read already the last. It was not that I feared for ourselves.
      <i>Us</i> our bulk and impetus charmed against peril in any collision. And
      I had ridden through too many hundreds of perils that were frightful to
      approach, that were matter of laughter to look back upon, the first face
      of which was horror, the parting face a jest&mdash;for any anxiety to rest
      upon <i>our</i> interests. The mail was not built, I felt assured, nor
      bespoke, that could betray <i>me</i> who trusted to its protection. But
      any carriage that we could meet would be frail and light in comparison of
      ourselves. And I remarked this ominous accident of our situation,&mdash;we
      were on the wrong side of the road. But then, it may be said, the other
      party, if other there was, might also be on the wrong side; and two wrongs
      might make a right. <i>That</i> was not likely. The same motive which had
      drawn <i>us</i> to the right-hand side of the road&mdash;viz., the luxury
      of the soft beaten sand as contrasted with the paved centre&mdash;would
      prove attractive to others. The two adverse carriages would therefore, to
      a certainty, be travelling on the same side; and from this side, as not
      being ours in law, the crossing over to the other would, of course, be
      looked for from <i>us</i>. [Footnote: It is true that, according to the
      law of the case as established by legal precedents, all carriages were
      required to give way before royal equipages, and therefore before the mail
      as one of them. But this only increased the danger, as being a regulation
      very imperfectly made known, very unequally enforced, and therefore often
      embarrassing the movements on both sides.] Our lamps, still lighted, would
      give the impression of vigilance on our part. And every creature that met
      us would rely upon <i>us</i> for quartering. [Footnote: "<i>Quartering</i>":&mdash;This
      is the technical word, and, I presume, derived from the French <i>cartayer</i>,
      to evade a rut or any obstacle.] All this, and if the separate links of
      the anticipation had been a thousand times more, I saw, not discursively,
      or by effort, or by succession, but by one flash of horrid simultaneous
      intuition.
    </p>
    <p>
      Under this steady though rapid anticipation of the evil which <i>might</i>
      be gathering ahead, ah! what a sullen mystery of fear, what a sigh of woe,
      was that which stole upon the air, as again the far-off sound of a wheel
      was heard! A whisper it was&mdash;a whisper from, perhaps, four miles off&mdash;secretly
      announcing a ruin that, being foreseen, was not the less inevitable; that,
      being known, was not therefore healed. What could be done&mdash;who was it
      that could do it&mdash;to check the storm-flight of these maniacal horses?
      Could I not seize the reins from the grasp of the slumbering coachman?
      You, reader, think that it would have been in <i>your</i> power to do so.
      And I quarrel not with your estimate of yourself. But, from the way in
      which the coachman's hand was viced between his upper and lower thigh,
      this was impossible. Easy was it? See, then, that bronze equestrian
      statue. The cruel rider has kept the bit in his horse's mouth for two
      centuries. Unbridle him for a minute, if you please, and wash his mouth
      with water. Easy was it? Unhorse me, then, that imperial rider; knock me
      those marble feet from those marble stirrups of Charlemagne.
    </p>
    <p>
      The sounds ahead strengthened, and were now too clearly the sounds of
      wheels. Who and what could it be? Was it industry in a taxed cart? Was it
      youthful gaiety in a gig? Was it sorrow that loitered, or joy that raced?
      For as yet the snatches of sound were too intermitting, from distance, to
      decipher the character of the motion. Whoever were the travellers,
      something must be done to warn them. Upon the other party rests the active
      responsibility, but upon <i>us</i>&mdash;and, woe is me! that <i>us</i>
      was reduced to my frail opium-shattered self&mdash;rests the
      responsibility of warning. Yet, how should this be accomplished? Might I
      not sound the guard's horn? Already, on the first thought, I was making my
      way over the roof of the guard's seat. But this, from the accident which I
      have mentioned, of the foreign mails being piled upon the roof, was a
      difficult and even dangerous attempt to one cramped by nearly three
      hundred miles of outside travelling. And, fortunately, before I had lost
      much time in the attempt, our frantic horses swept round an angle of the
      road which opened upon us that final stage where the collision must be
      accomplished and the catastrophe sealed. All was apparently finished. The
      court was sitting; the case was heard; the judge had finished; and only
      the verdict was yet in arrear.
    </p>
    <p>
      Before us lay an avenue straight as an arrow, six hundred yards, perhaps,
      in length; and the umbrageous trees, which rose in a regular line from
      either side, meeting high overhead, gave to it the character of a
      cathedral aisle. These trees lent a deeper solemnity to the early light;
      but there was still light enough to perceive, at the further end of this
      Gothic aisle, a frail reedy gig, in which were seated a young man, and by
      his side a young lady. Ah, young sir! what are you about? If it is
      requisite that you should whisper your communications to this young lady&mdash;though
      really I see nobody, at an hour and on a road so solitary, likely to
      overhear you&mdash;is it therefore requisite that you should carry your
      lips forward to hers? The little carriage is creeping on at one mile an
      hour; and the parties within it, being thus tenderly engaged, are
      naturally bending down their heads. Between them and eternity, to all
      human calculation, there is but a minute and a half. Oh heavens! what is
      it that I shall do? Speaking or acting, what help can I offer? Strange it
      is, and to a mere auditor of the tale might seem laughable, that I should
      need a suggestion from the "Iliad" to prompt the sole resource that
      remained. Yet so it was. Suddenly I remembered the shout of Achilles, and
      its effect. But could I pretend to shout like the son of Peleus, aided by
      Pallas? No: but then I needed not the shout that should alarm all Asia
      militant; such a shout would suffice as might carry terror into the hearts
      of two thoughtless young people and one gig-horse. I shouted&mdash;and the
      young man heard me not. A second time I shouted&mdash;and now he heard me,
      for now he raised his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here, then, all had been done that, by me, <i>could</i> be done; more on
      <i>my</i> part was not possible. Mine had been the first step; the second
      was for the young man; the third was for God. If, said I, this stranger is
      a brave man, and if indeed he loves the young girl at his side&mdash;or,
      loving her not, if he feels the obligation, pressing upon every man worthy
      to be called a man, of doing his utmost for a woman confided to his
      protection&mdash;he will at least make some effort to save her. If <i>that</i>
      fails, he will not perish the more, or by a death more cruel, for having
      made it; and he will die as a brave man should, with his face to the
      danger, and with his arm about the woman that he sought in vain to save.
      But, if he makes no effort,&mdash;shrinking without a struggle from his
      duty,&mdash;he himself will not the less certainly perish for this
      baseness of poltroonery. He will die no less: and why not? Wherefore
      should we grieve that there is one craven less in the world? No; <i>let</i>
      him perish, without a pitying thought of ours wasted upon him; and, in
      that case, all our grief will be reserved for the fate of the helpless
      girl who now, upon the least shadow of failure in <i>him</i>, must by the
      fiercest of translations&mdash;must without time for a prayer&mdash;must
      within seventy seconds stand before the judgment-seat of God.
    </p>
    <p>
      But craven he was not: sudden had been the call upon him, and sudden was
      his answer to the call. He saw, he heard, he comprehended, the ruin that
      was coming down: already its gloomy shadow darkened above him; and already
      he was measuring his strength to deal with it. Ah! what a vulgar thing
      does courage seem when we see nations buying it and selling it for a
      shilling a-day: ah! what a sublime thing does courage seem when some
      fearful summons on the great deeps of life carries a man, as if running
      before a hurricane, up to the giddy crest of some tumultuous crisis from
      which lie two courses, and a voice says to him audibly, "One way lies
      hope; take the other, and mourn for ever!" How grand a triumph if, even
      then, amidst the raving of all around him, and the frenzy of the danger,
      the man is able to confront his situation&mdash;is able to retire for a
      moment into solitude with God, and to seek his counsel from <i>Him!</i>
    </p>
    <p>
      For seven seconds, it might be, of his seventy, the stranger settled his
      countenance steadfastly upon us, as if to search and value every element
      in the conflict before him. For five seconds more of his seventy he sat
      immovably, like one that mused on some great purpose. For five more,
      perhaps, he sat with eyes upraised, like one that prayed in sorrow, under
      some extremity of doubt, for light that should guide him to the better
      choice. Then suddenly he rose; stood upright; and, by a powerful strain
      upon the reins, raising his horse's fore-feet from the ground, he slewed
      him round on the pivot of his hind-legs, so as to plant the little
      equipage in a position nearly at right angles to ours. Thus far his
      condition was not improved; except as a first step had been taken towards
      the possibility of a second. If no more were done, nothing was done; for
      the little carriage still occupied the very centre of our path, though in
      an altered direction. Yet even now it may not be too late: fifteen of the
      seventy seconds may still be unexhausted; and one almighty bound may avail
      to clear the ground. Hurry, then, hurry! for the flying moments&mdash;<i>they</i>
      hurry. Oh, hurry, hurry, my brave young man! for the cruel hoofs of our
      horses&mdash;<i>they</i> also hurry! Fast are the flying moments, faster
      are the hoofs of our horses. But fear not for <i>him</i>, if human energy
      can suffice; faithful was he that drove to his terrific duty; faithful was
      the horse to <i>his</i> command. One blow, one impulse given with voice
      and hand, by the stranger, one rush from the horse, one bound as if in the
      act of rising to a fence, landed the docile creature's forefeet upon the
      crown or arching centre of the road. The larger half of the little
      equipage had then cleared our over-towering shadow: <i>that</i> was
      evident even to my own agitated sight. But it mattered little that one
      wreck should float off in safety if upon the wreck that perished were
      embarked the human freightage. The rear part of the carriage&mdash;was <i>that</i>
      certainly beyond the line of absolute ruin? What power could answer the
      question? Glance of eye, thought of man, wing of angel, which of these had
      speed enough to sweep between the question and the answer, and divide the
      one from the other? Light does not tread upon the steps of light more
      indivisibly than did our all-conquering arrival upon the escaping efforts
      of the gig. <i>That</i> must the young man have felt too plainly. His back
      was now turned to us; not by sight could he any longer communicate with
      the peril; but, by the dreadful rattle of our harness, too truly had his
      ear been instructed that all was finished as regarded any effort of <i>his</i>.
      Already in resignation he had rested from his struggle; and perhaps in his
      heart he was whispering, "Father, which art in heaven, do Thou finish
      above what I on earth have attempted." Faster than ever mill-race we ran
      past them in our inexorable flight. Oh, raving of hurricanes that must
      have sounded in their young ears at the moment of our transit! Even in
      that moment the thunder of collision spoke aloud. Either with the
      swingle-bar, or with the haunch of our near leader, we had struck the
      off-wheel of the little gig; which stood rather obliquely, and not quite
      so far advanced as to be accurately parallel with the near-wheel. The
      blow, from the fury of our passage, resounded terrifically. I rose in
      horror, to gaze upon the ruins we might have caused. From my elevated
      station I looked down, and looked back upon the scene; which in a moment
      told its own tale, and wrote all its records on my heart for ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here was the map of the passion that now had finished. The horse was
      planted immovably, with his fore-feet upon the paved crest of the central
      road. He of the whole party might be supposed untouched by the passion of
      death. The little cany carriage&mdash;partly, perhaps, from the violent
      torsion of the wheels in its recent movement, partly from the thundering
      blow we had given to it&mdash;as if it sympathised with human horror, was
      all alive with tremblings and shiverings. The young man trembled not, nor
      shivered. He sat like a rock. But <i>his</i> was the steadiness of
      agitation frozen into rest by horror. As yet he dared not to look round;
      for he knew that, if anything remained to do, by him it could no longer be
      done. And as yet he knew not for certain if their safety were
      accomplished. But the lady&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      But the lady&mdash;! Oh, heavens! will that spectacle ever depart from my
      dreams, as she rose and sank upon her seat, sank and rose, threw up her
      arms wildly to heaven, clutched at some visionary object in the air,
      fainting, praying, raving, despairing? Figure to yourself, reader, the
      elements of the case; suffer me to recall before your mind the
      circumstances of that unparalleled situation. From the silence and deep
      peace of this saintly summer night&mdash;from the pathetic blending of
      this sweet moonlight, dawnlight, dreamlight&mdash;from the manly
      tenderness of this flattering, whispering, murmuring love&mdash;suddenly
      as from the woods and fields&mdash;suddenly as from the chambers of the
      air opening in revelation&mdash;suddenly as from the ground yawning at her
      feet, leaped upon her, with the flashing of cataracts, Death the crowned
      phantom, with all the equipage of his terrors, and the tiger roar of his
      voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      The moments were numbered; the strife was finished; the vision was closed.
      In the twinkling of an eye, our flying horses had carried us to the
      termination of the umbrageous aisle; at the right angles we wheeled into
      our former direction; the turn of the road carried the scene out of my
      eyes in an instant, and swept it into my dreams for ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      <br /><br />
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_SECT3" id="link2H_SECT3"> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      SECTION III&mdash;DREAM-FUGUE:
    </h2>
    <h3>
      FOUNDED ON THE PRECEDING THEME OF SUDDEN DEATH
    </h3>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
        "Whence the sound
  Of instruments, that made melodious chime,
  Was heard, of harp and organ; and who moved
  Their stops and chords was seen; his volant touch
  Instinct through all proportions, low and high,
  Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue."
  <i>Par. Lost</i>, Bk. XI.
</pre>
    <p>
      <i>Tumultuosissimamente</i>
    </p>
    <p>
      Passion of sudden death! that once in youth I read and interpreted by the
      shadows of thy averted signs [Footnote: "<i>Averted signs</i>":&mdash;I
      read the course and changes of the lady's agony in the succession of her
      involuntary gestures; but it must be remembered that I read all this from
      the rear, never once catching the lady's full face, and even her profile
      imperfectly.]!&mdash;rapture of panic taking the shape (which amongst
      tombs in churches I have seen) of woman bursting her sepulchral bonds&mdash;of
      woman's Ionic form bending forward from the ruins of her grave with
      arching foot, with eyes upraised, with clasped adoring hands&mdash;waiting,
      watching, trembling, praying for the trumpet's call to rise from dust for
      ever! Ah, vision too fearful of shuddering humanity on the brink of
      almighty abysses!&mdash;vision that didst start back, that didst reel
      away, like a shrivelling scroll from before the wrath of fire racing on
      the wings of the wind! Epilepsy so brief of horror, wherefore is it that
      thou canst not die? Passing so suddenly into darkness, wherefore is it
      that still thou sheddest thy sad funeral blights upon the gorgeous mosaics
      of dreams? Fragment of music too passionate, heard once, and heard no
      more, what aileth thee, that thy deep rolling chords come up at intervals
      through all the worlds of sleep, and after forty years have lost no
      element of horror?
    </p>
    <h3>
      I
    </h3>
    <p>
      Lo, it is summer&mdash;almighty summer! The everlasting gates of life and
      summer are thrown open wide; and on the ocean, tranquil and verdant as a
      savannah, the unknown lady from the dreadful vision and I myself are
      floating&mdash;she upon a fairy pinnace, and I upon an English
      three-decker. Both of us are wooing gales of festal happiness within the
      domain of our common country, within that ancient watery park, within the
      pathless chase of ocean, where England takes her pleasure as a huntress
      through winter and summer, from the rising to the setting sun. Ah, what a
      wilderness of floral beauty was hidden, or was suddenly revealed, upon the
      tropic islands through which the pinnace moved! And upon her deck what a
      bevy of human flowers: young women how lovely, young men how noble, that
      were dancing together, and slowly drifting towards <i>us</i> amidst music
      and incense, amidst blossoms from forests and gorgeous corymbi from
      vintages, amidst natural carolling, and the echoes of sweet girlish
      laughter. Slowly the pinnace nears us, gaily she hails us, and silently
      she disappears beneath the shadow of our mighty bows. But then, as at some
      signal from heaven, the music, and the carols, and the sweet echoing of
      girlish laughter&mdash;all are hushed. What evil has smitten the pinnace,
      meeting or overtaking her? Did ruin to our friends couch within our own
      dreadful shadow? Was our shadow the shadow of death? I looked over the bow
      for an answer, and, behold! the pinnace was dismantled; the revel and the
      revellers were found no more; the glory of the vintage was dust; and the
      forests with their beauty were left without a witness upon the seas. "But
      where," and I turned to our crew&mdash;"where are the lovely women that
      danced beneath the awning of flowers and clustering corymbi? Whither have
      fled the noble young men that danced with <i>them</i>?" Answer there was
      none. But suddenly the man at the mast-head, whose countenance darkened
      with alarm, cried out, "Sail on the weather beam! Down she comes upon us:
      in seventy seconds she also will founder."
    </p>
    <h3>
      II
    </h3>
    <p>
      I looked to the weather side, and the summer had departed. The sea was
      rocking, and shaken with gathering wrath. Upon its surface sat mighty
      mists, which grouped themselves into arches and long cathedral aisles.
      Down one of these, with the fiery pace of a quarrel from a cross-bow, ran
      a frigate right athwart our course. "Are they mad?" some voice exclaimed
      from our deck. "Do they woo their ruin?" But in a moment, as she was close
      upon us, some impulse of a heady current or local vortex gave a wheeling
      bias to her course, and off she forged without a shock. As she ran past
      us, high aloft amongst the shrouds stood the lady of the pinnace. The
      deeps opened ahead in malice to receive her, towering surges of foam ran
      after her, the billows were fierce to catch her. But far away she was
      borne into desert spaces of the sea: whilst still by sight I followed her,
      as she ran before the howling gale, chased by angry sea-birds and by
      maddening billows; still I saw her, as at the moment when she ran past us,
      standing amongst the shrouds, with her white draperies streaming before
      the wind. There she stood, with hair dishevelled, one hand clutched
      amongst the tackling&mdash;rising, sinking, fluttering, trembling,
      praying; there for leagues I saw her as she stood, raising at intervals
      one hand to heaven, amidst the fiery crests of the pursuing waves and the
      raving of the storm; until at last, upon a sound from afar of malicious
      laughter and mockery, all was hidden for ever in driving showers; and
      afterwards, but when I knew not, nor how.
    </p>
    <h3>
      III
    </h3>
    <p>
      Sweet funeral bells from some incalculable distance, wailing over the dead
      that die before the dawn, awakened me as I slept in a boat moored to some
      familiar shore. The morning twilight even then was breaking; and, by the
      dusky revelations which it spread, I saw a girl, adorned with a garland of
      white roses about her head for some great festival, running along the
      solitary strand in extremity of haste. Her running was the running of
      panic; and often she looked back as to some dreadful enemy in the rear.
      But, when I leaped ashore, and followed on her steps to warn her of a
      peril in front, alas! from me she fled as from another peril, and vainly I
      shouted to her of quicksands that lay ahead. Faster and faster she ran;
      round a promontory of rocks she wheeled out of sight; in an instant I also
      wheeled round it, but only to see the treacherous sands gathering above
      her head. Already her person was buried; only the fair young head and the
      diadem of white roses around it were still visible to the pitying heavens;
      and, last of all, was visible one white marble arm. I saw by the early
      twilight this fair young head, as it was sinking down to darkness&mdash;saw
      this marble arm, as it rose above her head and her treacherous grave,
      tossing, faltering, rising, clutching, as at some false deceiving hand
      stretched out from the clouds&mdash;saw this marble arm uttering her dying
      hope, and then uttering her dying despair. The head, the diadem, the arm&mdash;these
      all had sunk; at last over these also the cruel quicksand had closed; and
      no memorial of the fair young girl remained on earth, except my own
      solitary tears, and the funeral bells from the desert seas, that, rising
      again more softly, sang a requiem over the grave of the buried child, and
      over her blighted dawn.
    </p>
    <p>
      I sat, and wept in secret the tears that men have ever given to the memory
      of those that died before the dawn, and by the treachery of earth, our
      mother. But suddenly the tears and funeral bells were hushed by a shout as
      of many nations, and by a roar as from some great king's artillery,
      advancing rapidly along the valleys, and heard afar by echoes from the
      mountains. "Hush!" I said, as I bent my ear earthwards to listen&mdash;"hush!&mdash;this
      either is the very anarchy of strife, or else"&mdash;and then I listened
      more profoundly, and whispered as I raised my head&mdash;"or else, oh
      heavens! it is <i>victory</i> that is final, victory that swallows up all
      strife."
    </p>
    <h3>
      IV
    </h3>
    <p>
      Immediately, in trance, I was carried over land and sea to some distant
      kingdom, and placed upon a triumphal car, amongst companions crowned with
      laurel. The darkness of gathering midnight, brooding over all the land,
      hid from us the mighty crowds that were weaving restlessly about ourselves
      as a centre: we heard them, but saw them not. Tidings had arrived, within
      an hour, of a grandeur that measured itself against centuries; too full of
      pathos they were, too full of joy, to utter themselves by other language
      than by tears, by restless anthems, and <i>Te Deums</i> reverberated from
      the choirs and orchestras of earth. These tidings we that sat upon the
      laurelled car had it for our privilege to publish amongst all nations. And
      already, by signs audible through the darkness, by snortings and
      tramplings, our angry horses, that knew no fear or fleshly weariness,
      upbraided us with delay. Wherefore <i>was</i> it that we delayed? We
      waited for a secret word, that should bear witness to the hope of nations
      as now accomplished for ever. At midnight the secret word arrived; which
      word was&mdash;<i>Waterloo and Recovered Christendom!</i> The dreadful
      word shone by its own light; before us it went; high above our leaders'
      heads it rode, and spread a golden light over the paths which we
      traversed. Every city, at the presence of the secret word, threw open its
      gates. The rivers were conscious as we crossed. All the forests, as we ran
      along their margins, shivered in homage to the secret word. And the
      darkness comprehended it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Two hours after midnight we approached a mighty Minster. Its gates, which
      rose to the clouds, were closed. But, when the dreadful word that rode
      before us reached them with its golden light, silently they moved back
      upon their hinges; and at a flying gallop our equipage entered the grand
      aisle of the cathedral. Headlong was our pace; and at every altar, in the
      little chapels and oratories to the right hand and left of our course, the
      lamps, dying or sickening, kindled anew in sympathy with the secret word
      that was flying past. Forty leagues we might have run in the cathedral,
      and as yet no strength of morning light had reached us, when before us we
      saw the aerial galleries of organ and choir. Every pinnacle of fretwork,
      every station of advantage amongst the traceries, was crested by
      white-robed choristers that sang deliverance; that wept no more tears, as
      once their fathers had wept; but at intervals that sang together to the
      generations, saying,
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  "Chant the deliverer's praise in every tongue,"
</pre>
    <p>
      and receiving answers from afar,
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  "Such as once in heaven and earth were sung."
</pre>
    <p>
      And of their chanting was no end; of our headlong pace was neither pause
      nor slackening.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus as we ran like torrents&mdash;thus as we swept with bridal rapture
      over the Campo Santo [Footnote: "<i>Campo Santo</i>":&mdash;It is probable
      that most of my readers will be acquainted with the history of the Campo
      Santo (or cemetery) at Pisa, composed of earth brought from Jerusalem from
      a bed of sanctity as the highest prize which the noble piety of crusaders
      could ask or imagine. To readers who are unacquainted with England, or who
      (being English) are yet unacquainted with the cathedral cities of England,
      it may be right to mention that the graves within-side the cathedrals
      often form a flat pavement over which carriages and horses <i>might</i>
      run; and perhaps a boyish remembrance of one particular cathedral, across
      which I had seen passengers walk and burdens carried, as about two
      centuries back they were through the middle of St. Paul's in London, may
      have assisted my dream.] of the cathedral graves&mdash;suddenly we became
      aware of a vast necropolis rising upon the far-off horizon&mdash;a city of
      sepulchres, built within the saintly cathedral for the warrior dead that
      rested from their feuds on earth. Of purple granite was the necropolis;
      yet, in the first minute, it lay like a purple stain upon the horizon, so
      mighty was the distance. In the second minute it trembled through many
      changes, growing into terraces and towers of wondrous altitude, so mighty
      was the pace. In the third minute already, with our dreadful gallop, we
      were entering its suburbs. Vast sarcophagi rose on every side, having
      towers and turrets that, upon the limits of the central aisle, strode
      forward with haughty intrusion, that ran back with mighty shadows into
      answering recesses. Every sarcophagus showed many bas-reliefs&mdash;bas-reliefs
      of battles and of battle-fields; battles from forgotten ages, battles from
      yesterday; battle-fields that, long since, nature had healed and
      reconciled to herself with the sweet oblivion of flowers; battle-fields
      that were yet angry and crimson with carnage. Where the terraces ran,
      there did <i>we</i> run; where the towers curved, there did <i>we</i>
      curve. With the flight of swallows our horses swept round every angle.
      Like rivers in flood wheeling round headlands, like hurricanes that ride
      into the secrets of forests, faster than ever light unwove the mazes of
      darkness, our flying equipage carried earthly passions, kindled warrior
      instincts, amongst the dust that lay around us&mdash;dust oftentimes of
      our noble fathers that had slept in God from Crécy to Trafalgar. And now
      had we reached the last sarcophagus, now were we abreast of the last
      bas-relief, already had we recovered the arrow-like flight of the
      illimitable central aisle, when coming up this aisle to meet us we beheld
      afar off a female child, that rode in a carriage as frail as flowers. The
      mists which went before her hid the fawns that drew her, but could not
      hide the shells and tropic flowers with which she played&mdash;but could
      not hide the lovely smiles by which she uttered her trust in the mighty
      cathedral, and in the cherubim that looked down upon her from the mighty
      shafts of its pillars. Face to face she was meeting us; face to face she
      rode, as if danger there were none. "Oh, baby!" I exclaimed, "shalt thou
      be the ransom for Waterloo? Must we, that carry tidings of great joy to
      every people, be messengers of ruin to thee!" In horror I rose at the
      thought; but then also, in horror at the thought, rose one that was
      sculptured on a bas-relief&mdash;a Dying Trumpeter. Solemnly from the
      field of battle he rose to his feet; and, unslinging his stony trumpet,
      carried it, in his dying anguish, to his stony lips&mdash;sounding once,
      and yet once again; proclamation that, in <i>thy</i> ears, oh baby! spoke
      from the battlements of death. Immediately deep shadows fell between us,
      and aboriginal silence. The choir had ceased to sing. The hoofs of our
      horses, the dreadful rattle of our harness, the groaning of our wheels,
      alarmed the graves no more. By horror the bas-relief had been unlocked
      unto life. By horror we, that were so full of life, we men and our horses,
      with their fiery fore-legs rising in mid air to their everlasting gallop,
      were frozen to a bas-relief. Then a third time the trumpet sounded; the
      seals were taken off all pulses; life, and the frenzy of life, tore into
      their channels again; again the choir burst forth in sunny grandeur, as
      from the muffling of storms and darkness; again the thunderings of our
      horses carried temptation into the graves. One cry burst from our lips, as
      the clouds, drawing off from the aisle, showed it empty before us.&mdash;"Whither
      has the infant fled?&mdash;is the young child caught up to God?" Lo! afar
      off, in a vast recess, rose three mighty windows to the clouds; and on a
      level with their summits, at height insuperable to man, rose an altar of
      purest alabaster. On its eastern face was trembling a crimson glory. A
      glory was it from the reddening dawn that now streamed <i>through</i> the
      windows? Was it from the crimson robes of the martyrs painted <i>on</i>
      the windows? Was it from the bloody bas-reliefs of earth? There, suddenly,
      within that crimson radiance, rose the apparition of a woman's head, and
      then of a woman's figure. The child it was&mdash;grown up to woman's
      height. Clinging to the horns of the altar, voiceless she stood&mdash;sinking,
      rising, raving, despairing; and behind the volume of incense that, night
      and day, streamed upwards from the altar, dimly was seen the fiery font,
      and the shadow of that dreadful being who should have baptized her with
      the baptism of death. But by her side was kneeling her better angel, that
      hid his face with wings; that wept and pleaded for <i>her</i>; that prayed
      when <i>she</i> could <i>not</i>; that fought with Heaven by tears for <i>her</i>
      deliverance; which also, as he raised his immortal countenance from his
      wings, I saw, by the glory in his eye, that from Heaven he had won at
      last.
    </p>
    <h3>
      V
    </h3>
    <p>
      Then was completed the passion of the mighty fugue. The golden tubes of
      the organ, which as yet had but muttered at intervals&mdash;gleaming
      amongst clouds and surges of incense&mdash;threw up, as from fountains
      unfathomable, columns of heart-shattering music. Choir and anti-choir were
      filling fast with unknown voices. Thou also, Dying Trumpeter, with thy
      love that was victorious, and thy anguish that was finishing, didst enter
      the tumult; trumpet and echo&mdash;farewell love, and farewell anguish&mdash;rang
      through the dreadful <i>sanctus</i>. Oh, darkness of the grave! that from
      the crimson altar and from the fiery font wert visited and searched by the
      effulgence in the angel's eye&mdash;were these indeed thy children? Pomps
      of life, that, from the burials of centuries, rose again to the voice of
      perfect joy, did ye indeed mingle with the festivals of Death? Lo! as I
      looked back for seventy leagues through the mighty cathedral, I saw the
      quick and the dead that sang together to God, together that sang to the
      generations of man. All the hosts of jubilation, like armies that ride in
      pursuit, moved with one step. Us, that, with laurelled heads, were passing
      from the cathedral, they overtook, and, as with a garment, they wrapped us
      round with thunders greater than our own. As brothers we moved together;
      to the dawn that advanced, to the stars that fled; rendering thanks to God
      in the highest&mdash;that, having hid His face through one generation
      behind thick clouds of War, once again was ascending, from the Campo Santo
      of Waterloo was ascending, in the visions of Peace; rendering thanks for
      thee, young girl! whom having overshadowed with His ineffable passion of
      death, suddenly did God relent, suffered thy angel to turn aside His arm,
      and even in thee, sister unknown! shown to me for a moment only to be
      hidden for ever, found an occasion to glorify His goodness. A thousand
      times, amongst the phantoms of sleep, have I seen thee entering the gates
      of the golden dawn, with the secret word riding before thee, with the
      armies of the grave behind thee,&mdash;seen thee sinking, rising, raving,
      despairing; a thousand times in the worlds of sleep have I seen thee
      followed by God's angel through storms, through desert seas, through the
      darkness of quicksands, through dreams and the dreadful revelations that
      are in dreams; only that at the last, with one sling of His victorious
      arm, He might snatch thee back from ruin, and might emblazon in thy
      deliverance the endless resurrections of His love!
    </p>

</section>
</body>
</html>
