<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Princess Who Overlooked One Seed in a Pomegranate</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-princess-who-overlooked-one-seed-in-a-pomegranate" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Princess Who Overlooked One Seed in a Pomegranate</h2>

<p>There is a story told in the 'Arabian Nights' of a princess
who, by overlooking one seed of a pomegranate, precipitated
the event which she had laboured to make impossible.
She lies in wait for the event which she foresees.
The pomegranate swells, opens, splits; the seeds, which
she knows to be roots of evil, rapidly she swallows; but
one&mdash;only one&mdash;before it could be arrested, rolls away
into a river. It is lost! it is irrecoverable! She has
triumphed, but she must perish. Already she feels the
flames mounting up which are to consume her, and she
calls for water hastily&mdash;not to deliver herself (for that is
impossible), but, nobly forgetting her own misery, that
she may prevent that destruction of her brother mortal
which had been the original object for hazarding her own.
Yet why go to Arabian fictions? Even in our daily life
is exhibited, in proportions far more gigantic, that tendency
to swell and amplify itself into mountains of darkness,
which exists oftentimes in germs that are imperceptible.
An error in human choice, an infirmity in the
human will, though it were at first less than a mote,
though it should swerve from the right line by an interval
less than any thread</p>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">'That ever spider twisted from her womb,'<br /></span>
</div></div>

<p><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_23" id="Page_23">[Pg 23]</a></span>sometimes begins to swell, to grow, to widen its distance
rapidly, travels off into boundless spaces remote from the
true centre, spaces incalculable and irretraceable, until
hope seems extinguished and return impossible. Such
was the course of my own opium career. Such is the
history of human errors every day. Such was the
original sin of the Greek theories on Deity, which could
not have been healed but by putting off their own nature,
and kindling into a new principle&mdash;absolutely undiscoverable,
as I contend, for the Grecian intellect.</p>

<p>Oftentimes an echo goes as it were to sleep: the series
of reverberations has died away. Suddenly a second
series awakens: this subsides, then a third wakens up.
So of actions done in youth. After great tumults all is
quieted. You dream that they are over. In a moment,
in the twinkling of an eye, on some fatal morning in
middle-life the far-off consequences come back upon you.
And you say to yourself, 'Oh, Heaven, if I had fifty lives
this crime would reappear, as Pelion upon Ossa!' So
was it with my affection. Left to natural peace, I might
have conquered it: <i>Verschmerzeon.</i> To charm it down by
the mere suffering of grief, to hush it by endurance, that
was the natural policy&mdash;that was the natural process.
But behold! A new form of sorrow arises, and the two
multiply together. And the worm which was beginning
to fall asleep is roused again to pestilential fierceness.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_24" id="Page_24">[Pg 24]</a></span></p>

</section>
</body>
</html>
