<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Solitude of Childhood</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-solitude-of-childhood" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Solitude of Childhood</h2>

<p>As nothing which is impassioned escapes the eye of
poetry, neither has this escaped it&mdash;that there is, or may
be, through solitude, 'sublime attractions of the grave.'
But even poetry has not perceived that these attractions
may arise for a child. Not, indeed, a passion for the
grave <i>as</i> the grave&mdash;from <i>that</i> a child revolts; but a
passion for the grave as the portal through which it may
recover some heavenly countenance, mother or sister,
that has vanished. Through solitude this passion may
be exalted into a frenzy like a nympholepsy. At first,
when in childhood we find ourselves torn away from the
lips that we could hang on for ever, we throw out our
arms in vain struggles to snatch at them, and pull them
back again. But when we have felt for a time how hopeless
is that effort, and that they cannot come to <i>us</i>, we
desist from that struggle, and next we whisper to our
hearts, Might not we go to <i>them</i>?</p>

<p>Such in principle and origin was the famous <i>Dulce
Domum</i><a name="FNanchor_4_4" id="FNanchor_4_4"></a><a href="#Footnote_4_4" class="fnanchor">[4]</a> of the English schoolboy. Such is the <i>Heimweh</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_14" id="Page_14">[Pg 14]</a></span>
(home-sickness) of the German and Swiss soldier in
foreign service. Such is the passion of the Calenture.
Doubtless, reader, you have seen it described. The poor
sailor is in tropical latitudes; deep, breathless calms
have prevailed for weeks. Fever and delirium are upon
him. Suddenly from his restless hammock he starts up;
he will fret no longer in darkness; he ascends upon
deck. How motionless are the deeps! How vast&mdash;how
sweet are these shining zaarrahs of water! He gazes,
and slowly under the blazing scenery of his brain the
scenery of his eye unsettles. The waters are swallowed
up; the seas have disappeared. Green fields appear,
a silent dell, and a pastoral cottage. Two faces appear&mdash;are
at the door&mdash;sweet female faces, and behold they
beckon him. 'Come to us!' they seem to say. The
picture rises to his wearied brain like a <i>sanctus</i> from the
choir of a cathedral, and in the twinkling of an eye,
stung to madness by the cravings of his heart, the man
is overboard. He is gone&mdash;he is lost for this world; but
if he missed the arms of the lovely women&mdash;wife and
sister&mdash;whom he sought, assuredly he has settled into
arms that are mightier and not less indulgent.</p>

<p>I, young as I was, had one feeling not learned from
books, and that <i>could</i> not have been learned from books,
the deepest of all that connect themselves with natural
scenery. It is the feeling which in 'The Hart-leap Well'
of Wordsworth, in his 'Danish Boy,' and other exquisite
poems is brought out, viz., the breathless, mysterious,
Pan-like silence that haunts the noon-day. If there were
winds abroad, then I was roused myself into sympathetic
tumults. But if this dead silence haunted the air, then
the peace which was in nature echoed another peace
which lay in graves, and I fell into a sick languishing for<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_15" id="Page_15">[Pg 15]</a></span>
things which a voice from heaven seemed to say '<i>cannot</i>
be granted.'</p>

<p>There is a German superstition, which eight or ten
years after I read, of the Erl-king and his daughter. The
daughter had power to tempt infants away into the invisible
world; but it is, as the reader understands, by
collusion with some infirmity of sick desire for such
worlds in the infant itself.</p>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">'Who is that rides through the forest so fast?'<br /></span>
</div></div>

<p>It is a knight who carries his infant upon his saddle-bow.
The Erl-king's daughter rides by his side; and, in
words audible only when she means them to be heard,
she says:</p>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">'If thou wilt, dear baby, with me go away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We will see a fine show, we will play a fine play.'<br /></span>
</div></div>

<p>That sounds lovely to my ears. Oh yes, that collusion
with dim sleeping infancy is lovely to me; but I was too
advanced in intellect to have been tempted by <i>such</i>
temptations. Still there was a perilous attraction for
me in worlds that slept and rested; and if the Erl-king's
daughter had revealed herself to my perceptions, there
was one 'show' that she might have promised which
would have wiled me away with her into the dimmest
depths of the mightiest and remotest forests.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_16" id="Page_16">[Pg 16]</a></span></p>

</section>
</body>
</html>
